Chapter 6: Misplaced Modifiers
A misplaced modifier is a word, phrase, or clause that is improperly separated from the noun
that it modifies. A misplaced modifier leads to a sentence that has an incorrect or unintended meaning.
Misplaced modifiers are hard to spot because we usually know what the sentence is really supposed to
be saying.
Incorrect: Consistently erupting, Jack loves taking pictures of the Old Faithful geyser at
Yellowstone National Park.

So what's wrong here? The modifier “consistently erupting” is supposed to be modifying the Old
Faithful geyser, but instead it is modifying Jack! Let’s hope Jack is not consistently erupting. When a
sentence begins with a modifying phrase, the phrase must modify the very first noun that follows the
comma. There are two ways to fix this error:
Correct: Consistently erupting, the Old Faithful geyser at Yellowstone National Park is one of
Jack’s favorite things to take pictures of.
Correct: Since it is consistently erupting, Jack loves taking pictures of the Old Faithful geyser at
Yellowstone National Park.

In the first correct version, the modifier “consistently erupting” is right next to and correctly modifying
the Old Faithful geyser. In the second correct version, we added a pronoun “it” to change the modifier
from a phrase to a dependent clause, so we now know that the geyser is erupting. When we get to

“Jack,” there is no longer any confusion about who or what is erupting.

TIP - “Next-door Neighbor Rule”
For a modifier to be properly placed, it must be right “next-door” to the noun it is describing. Modifiers
can be at the beginning, middle, or end of a sentence.
If the modifier is at the beginning of the sentence, the first noun after must be the word being

modified.

cn

Running from the police, Eric hopped the fence and hid underneatha car.
If the modifier is in the middle or end of the sentence, it must be modifying the noun directly
before it.
Dr. Anderson, a world-renown surgeon, fixed my broken leg.

ar,

© PrepPros 2025

- 62 -

PrepPros ACT English Course

Front of the Sentence Modifiers with a Comma
On the ACT, most misplaced modifiers questions have a modifier at the front of the sentence
separated by a comma. For this type of question, consider who or what the modifier is describing and
then make sure that person, place, or thing is the first noun in the rest of the sentence.
Incorrect: Not popular since the early 1980s, the documentary about mullets explored the origins of
the wildly popular hairstyle.
Correct:

Not popular since the early 1980s, mullets were the topic of a recently released
documentary.

The modifier is “not popular since the early 1980s,” so the next noun must be whoever or whatever the
modifier is describing. In the incorrect version, the next noun “documentaries” is not what we are
supposed to be describing. The correct version puts the described word “mullets” right next-door to the
modifier at the beginning of the sentence.
Practice:
1.

Addressing the group of reporters gathered

A. NO CHANGE

B. the police chief said he did not know if the

outside of the police station, there was no

suspect was in custody or not.

1
indication that the police chief knew if the suspect

C. no indication of whether or not the suspect
was in custody was given by the police

was in custody or not.

chief.

1

D. the police chief's report gave no indication
of whether the suspect was in custody or
not.

|

2.

A brand new approach to automobile

A.

Ford, installed the first moving assembly

manufacturing, Henry Ford and Ford Motor

line in 1913.

2

Company installed the first moving assembly line

C. the first moving assembly line was
;

2

mn 1913.

NO CHANGE

B. the Ford Motor Company, owned by Henry

installed by Henry Ford and Ford Motor

3

Company in 1913.

D. 1913 was the first year that Henry Ford
and the Ford Motor Company installed the
moving assembly line.

. NO CHANGE

Designed for beauty and symmetry, Laura
3

Saunders created a modern art museum that is an

By designing it for beauty and symmetry

. A design with beauty and symmetry

architectural marvel.

© PrepPros 2025

>gow

Both beautiful and symmetric

- 63 -

PrepPros ACT English Course

Middle or the End of the Sentence Modifier with Commas
A modifier in the middle or at the end of the sentence must be directly after whoever or whatever
it is modifying.
Incorrect: The research team, which arrived at their nesting grounds early this year, tracked the
movements of the blue storks.
Correct: The research team tracked the movements of the blue storks, which arrived at their nesting
grounds early this year.
Correct: The research team, which tracked the movement of the blue storks, noted that the birds
arrived at their nesting grounds early.

In the incorrect example, the modifier “which arrived at their nesting grounds early this year” was
incorrectly modifying the research team. However, this modifier should be modifying the blue storks, so

the first correct example moves the modifier to the end of the sentence right “next-door” to the blue
storks. We could also fix the incorrect sentence by changing the modifier in the middle as is displayed in

the second correct example. The new modifier “which tracked the movement of the blue storks” now
properly modifies the research team.
Practice:

There was little doubt that the new technique for

1.

A. NO CHANGE

B. which had been caught earlier this

deep frying the cod, which uses less oil and a new

morning

1

type of batter, results in a more crispy and less

C. one that is popular among locals

D. using hotter oil and smaller pieces of fish

1

oily breading.

Modifiers without Commas
In some questions, the modifier will not be separated by any commas. These are the harder to spot, but

the “next-door neighbor’ rule still applies. Keep an eye out for phrases starting with “that” or words
ending in “-ing” and “-ed.”
Incorrect: A tarantula bit one of my coworkers that had a huge, hairy body.
Correct:

A tarantula that had a huge, hairy body bit one of my coworkers.

The incorrect sentence has the modifier “that had a huge, hairy body” describing the coworker and not
the tarantula. By moving the modifier right next to the tarantula in the correct sentence, we are
describing the tarantula as having a huge, hairy body.
Practice:
1.

Three businessmen talked on the balcony

A. NO CHANGE

B. celebrating the deal talked on the balcony

1

smoking cigars.

smoking cigars to celebrate the deal,
:

C. smoking cigars talked to celebrate the deal
on the balcony.
D. smoking cigars to celebrate the deal talked
on the balcony.

© PrepPros 2025

- 64 -

PrepPros ACT English Course

Prepositional Phrases as Modifiers
Prepositional phrases can also act as modifiers and must be placed in the correct position to
have the intended meaning. These occur less commonly on the ACT and are often difficult to spot.
Incorrect: Paul and his father talked about the baseball game in the stands.
Correct: In the stands, Paul and his father talked about the baseball game.
In the first sentence, the baseball game is in the stands. We know that’s not the case, so we need to move

the prepositional phrase “in the stands” to the beginning of the sentence. Now, the phrase is describing
Paul and his father as being in the stands.
Practice:

1.

The Subaru dealership sold the new car to the

The best placement for the underlined

portion would be:

buyer with automatic parallel parking.

A. where it is now.

1

B. after the word Subaru.
C . after the word sold.
D . after the word car.

Modifiers in Parentheses
Modifiers that are set apart in parentheses must be placed directly “next-door” to whoever or
whatever they are modifying. Phrases in parentheses will always be in the middle or end of the
sentence, so the word being described must be right before the parentheses. This type of misplaced
modifier is very rarely test on the ACT.
Incorrect:

The scientists tried to develop a new method to make their self-pollination study (where
pollen from the same plant arrives at the stigma of the flower) completely free of pollen
contamination from other plants.

Correct:

The scientists tried to develop a new method to study self-pollination (where pollen from
the same plant arrives at the stigma of the flower) completely free of pollen
contamination from other plants.

The modifier in the parentheses is defining what self-pollination is, so self-pollination must be directly
before the parentheses, as it is in the correct sentence. In the incorrect sentence, the word study is
directly before the parentheses, so the modifier in parentheses is incorrectly describing the selfpollination study.
Practice:

Plant the roses in a sunny spot in the backyard

1.

A. NO CHANGE

and be sure to water them every day just after

B. recommended the expert gardener

sunrise, the expert gardener recommended (who

C. was the expert gardener’s
recommendation

had been growing and selling his own roses for

D. the gardener, who was an expert,
recommended

the past two decades).

© PrepPros 2025

-65 -

PrepPros ACT English Course

TIP - How to Spot Misplaced Modifiers Questions
The hardest part about misplaced modifiers questions is spotting them! Most students think these
questions are about phrasing or flow and never realize what they are actually being tested on.
Misplaced modifiers questions always have at least one and, very often, both of the following
defining characteristics:
1.

All 4 answer choices are similar in length, and the answer choices have the same words
scrambled in different orders. Anytime you see 4 long answer choices that are all saying the
same general thing in different orders, you are very likely looking at a misplaced modifiers
question.

2.

The first word varies in the answer choices. If the first word or group of words is different in
3 or 4 of the answer choices, the question is most likely testing you on misplaced modifiers.

On the ACT, misplaced modifiers questions will look like this:
Analyzing the ultraviolet camera footage,
scientists discovered that fish

communicate using UV coloration and

1.

Which choice makes the sentence most
grammatically acceptable?

.

signaling.

NO CHANGE

fish were found to communicate using UV
coloration and signaling.

C.

it was discovered by scientists that fish
communicate using UV coloration and signaling.

D.

UV coloration and signaling were discovered as
a way fish communicate.

Whenever you spot a misplaced modifiers question, identify the modifier and ask yourself, “who
or what is the modifier describing?” In this example, the modifier is “analyzing the ultraviolet camera
footage.” Who or what is analyzing the camera footage? The scientists! Since “the scientists” must be
right next-door, the answer is A.

© PrepPros 2025

- 66 -

PrepPros ACT English Course

Chapter 6 Practice:
Eric’s foot indicated his nervousness during the

NO CHANGE

1

Eric’s foot indicated his nervousness

interview, which jiggled wildly.

during the interview, jiggling wildly.

1

Eric’s foot, which jiggled wildly, indicated
his nervousness during the interview.
. Jiggling wildly during the interview, Eric
showed his nervousness.
NO CHANGE

Oozing slowly across the ground, Claire watched
2

Claire’s smoothie flowed towards the

her smoothie flow towards the kitchen.

kitchen.

2

there was Claire’s smoothie flowing
towards the kitchen.
. the kitchen was where Claire’s smoothie
flowed.

Mrs. James will make evening gowns for special
customers with sequins if the request is made at

The best placement for the underlined
portion would be:
. Where it isnow

>VOW

3

least three weeks ahead of time.

. after the word gowns.
after the word request.

. after the word weeks.

Since they betrayed the country and sold secrets
4

to the Soviet Union, many American historians
4

regard Christopher John Boye as one of the
biggest traitors in history.

. NO CHANGE

. Since he betrayed his country and sold
secrets to the Soviet Union,
Betraying his country and selling secrets
to the Soviet Union,
. Known for his famous betrayal,

In hot pursuit on a bicycle, the escaped lemurs
5

were chased by animal control.

. NO CHANGE

. the escaped lemurs were running away
from animal control.

5

animal control chased the escaped
lemurs.
. chasing the lemurs was animal control.
. NO CHANGE

A team of ecologists recently discovered the
Strawberry Posion Dart Frog during a taxological
study in the Amazon (a type of frog first
6

discovered by scientists in 2013).
6

© PrepPros 2025

. (astudy meant to classify new species of
animals).
(one of the last true wild and unknown
places on the earth).
. (and during the study they also
discovered five other new species).

PrepPros ACT English Course

All of my teachers and teammates loved the two

>OW

Siberian Huskies. Highly energetic and
intelligent, they are friendly to everyone.

NO CHANGE

Siberian Huskies are friendly to everyone.
many owners know that Siberian Huskies
are friendly to everyone.

Oo . everyone is treated as a friend by Siberian

7

Huskies.
NO CHANGE

Designating it as a state landmark in

The Minnesota Governor honored Charles

1976, Charles Lindberg’s house was

8

honored by the Governor of Minnesota.

Lindberg’s house by designating it as a state

By designating it as a state landmark,

8

landmark in 1976.

1976 was the year Charles Lindberg’s

8

house was honored by the Minnesota
Governor.

. Designated as a state landmark in 1976,
the Minnesota Governor honored Charles
Lindberg’s house.
NO CHANGE

revolutionary, new ideas were combined

In designing a new water filtration system,

with common elements.
common elements were combined with

engineers’ borrowing of common

9

elements were combined with

revolutionary, new ideas.

revolutionary, new ideas.

9

. engineers combined common elements
with new, revolutionary ideas.

Covered with license plates from around the

10. A. NO CHANGE

tourists love to take pictures of the walls
at Bub’s Burgers.

world, the walls at Bub’s Burgers are always a
10

photos in front of the walls at Bub’s

popular photo op for tourists.

Burgers are very popular for tourists.

10

. Bub’s Burgers is a popular photo op for
tourists.

Flying south for their winter migration, the

11.

11

researchers determined that the butterflies had

12

steak must be carefully laid away from the cook
12

to prevent getting burned.
12

When they flew

. By flying

an innate sense of direction.

Using a piping hot pan with oil glistening, the

GOD

NO CHANGE

When the butterflies flew

12.

>

NO CHANGE

. the cook must carefully lay the steak
away from himself to prevent getting
burned.
the cook’s steak must carefully be laid
away from the cook to prevent getting
burned.
. prevent getting burned by carefully laying
the steak away.

© PrepPros 2025

PrepPros ACT English Course

Spending her entire life laying eggs, the worker

13. A. NO CHANGE

13

Carrying up to fifty times their body

ants are responsible for building and

weights,
Since it can carry up to fifty times its body

maintaining the nest while the bigger queen ant

weight,

is responsible for the future generations of the

. Studying how the nest functions on a dayto-day basis,

colony.

In the 1920s, while swimming hundreds of feet

14.

NO CHANGE

Old Tom, the orca whale, successfully

below the fishing boat in the freezing cold

hunted large schools of fish with sailors.
it was large schools of fish that were

waters off Australia, sailors successfully hunted

successfully hunted by Old Tom, the orca

14

large schools of fish with Old Tom, the orca

whale, and sailors.

14

. sailors with the help of Old Tom, the orca

whale.

whale, successfully hunted large schools

14

of fish.

England’s transition from a monarchy to a

15. Which of the following placement of the
underlined portion makes it clear that the

Democratic Republic vastly shifted the power

King or Queen had decreased power?

structure of the government. The greatly

GOD

15

decreased Queen or King had an amount of
15

power in making decisions for the nation.

In his shop in Encinitas, surfboards are carefully

where it is now.
before the word power.
before the word nation.

. before the word amount (and change “an”

16.

to

“a’) .

NO CHANGE

shaper Enzo Rivas carefully handcrafts

16

surfboards.

handcrafted by shaper Enzo Rivas.

there are surfboards being carefully

16

handcrafted by shaper Enzo Rivas.
. Enzo Riva’s surfboards are carefully
handcrafted.

The soccer analyst decided that the best player
17

of all time was Pele (who was chosen as the
17

athlete of the century by the International
Olympic Committee in 1999).

© PrepPros 2025

17.

NO CHANGE

Pele was chosen by the soccer analyst as
the best player of all time
Pele was named the best player of all time
by the soccer analyst
. The best player of all time was Pele, the
soccer analyst decided

PrepPros ACT English Course

18. Which placement of the underlined portion

In 2014, Peyton Manning won his last game in
18

makes clear that the game was Payton

Denver 47-14 over the Oakland Raiders.

Manning’s last game in 2014 and not his last
game ever?

wo>N
Now in widespread use across many homes, a 60

19.

19

minutes segment featured the Roomba.
19

>OW

where it is now
after the word Manning.
after the word game.
after the word Raiders (and before the
period).

NO CHANGE
the Roomba was featured on 60 minutes.
the Roomba’s segment was featured on
60 minutes.

. 60 minutes featured the Roomba.

By combining information about the positions of

20. The best placement for the underlined
portion would be:

the galaxies and the refraction of light, Dr.

A. where it isnow

Klitzhoff was able to discover a new grouping of

B. before the word positions.
C. before the word planets.

planets thousands of light years away.
20

© PrepPros 2025

D. DELETE the underlined portion.

-70-

PrepPros ACT English Course

