Chapter 1: 7 Core Principles for ACT Reading
Before we start learning all the best approaches, strategies, and test-taking tips to maximize your Reading
score, let’s start by understanding 7 core principles about the ACT Reading Test. These principles will help
you start to understand how the Reading Test works. Keep these core principles in mind as you work through
the rest of the course!
Students who struggle on the Reading Test generally do so for 2 reasons: issues with time management

and difficulty understanding the key difference between correct and incorrect answer choices. We will
focus more on time management later in this course. For now, the following 7 core principles will help you
start to better understand the difference between correct and incorrect answer choices.

7 Core Principles to Understand
To start, let’s go over 7 very important core principles that we must understand about the Reading Test.

Principle #1 — The correct answer must be supported by evidence in the passage.
For an answer choice to be correct, we must be able to point to evidence in the passage. The ACT must be
able to support the correct answer and say, “look, here is why this answer choice is correct,” so there is

ALWAYS evidence in the passage. In general, once you find the correct evidence in the passage, the correct
answer choice will become obvious.

Principle #2 — The correct answer must be 100% correct. That means every single word in

the answer choice must be correct.
As you read the answer choices, read every single word carefully and make sure that each word is correct. The
correct answer must be 100% correct. Keep an eye out for strong or specific statements in each answer
choice that may not be supported by the passage and can make the answer choice incorrect.

For example, if an answer choice says, “sea turtles eat a diet consisting mostly of fish during migration,” you
need to make sure the passage actually says that sea turtles eat mostly fish during migration. If the passage
says, “sea turtles eat fish, crabs, and seagrass during their annual migration,” that is not 100% correct because
including fish is not eating mostly fish. While this may seem like a small difference, reading this carefully can
make a huge difference in your score.

Principle #3 — A single word can make the entire answer choice incorrect.
This is really important, so we will repeat it. A single word can make the entire answer choice incorrect!
Anything wrong with an answer choice makes the entire answer choice incorrect. Even if 90% of an

answer choice matches exactly what the passage says, an incorrect word makes the entire answer choice
incorrect. Be very picky and consider every single word as you assess each answer choice.

© PrepPros 2025

-3-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

Principle #4 — Do not just match words from the passage. Match the entire answer choice.
Many students make the mistake of picking an incorrect answer choice because it has an exact word or phrase
from the passage. Sometimes the answer choice with the exact word or phrase from the passage matches the
evidence and is correct. However, other times the answer choice is incorrect because it does not 100% match
the passage. The ACT often includes incorrect answer choices that have exact word(s) from the passage
to trick you.

Make sure that you do not get too excited when you find an exact word or phrase from the passage in the
answer choices. Instead, use Principles #2 and #3 and match the entire answer choice to the evidence in the
passage. As we already said, the correct answer must be 100% correct.

Principle #5 — Find Your Waldo (over and over again)!
If you find the right evidence in the passage, the correct answer should be obvious. The challenge is
finding the right evidence — and finding it quickly! If you have ever done a “Where’s Waldo” book, you know

exactly what I mean. You know Waldo is in there, but sometimes he is so hard to find! ACT Reading is the
exact same; the evidence is in there, but sometimes it is hard to find. Once you find the evidence, you will
know which answer choice is correct!

For most students who answer a question on a Reading passage incorrectly, if I tell them what line(s) to look
at, they will likely be able to look at the answer choices and go, “Oh, I see it now. The answer is A.” As we
said before, the difficulty of the ACT Reading for most students is the speed of the test and not the
comprehension of the passages.

Principle #6 — No storytelling!
If you are telling a story to convince yourself why an answer choice is correct or could be correct, the

answer is probably wrong. There is always evidence in the passage to support the correct answer, so you
should never have to go through a long justification of why an answer choice 1s correct.
Instead, put your finger on the right answer (Find Your Waldo!). As we said earlier, there is always
evidence in the passage, so you should always aim to point to a specific part of the passage and say, “this is
why my answer is correct.”

Principle #7 — The ACT Reading Test is more about speed than comprehension.
If you have an extra 5 minutes for the Reading Test, it would be so much easier! The hardest thing about the
ACT Reading for most students is time management. Finishing 4 long passages with 9 questions each in
only 40 minutes is challenging. Most students do not find the passages themselves that difficult. Instead, the

challenge is that you do not have enough time to answer all the questions.
As you work through this course, keep this principle in mind. Do not feel the need to read for depth, as the
questions are likely not going to require deep knowledge of the passage. Instead, the questions will require
you to remember specific details from throughout the passage. As a result, you can read ACT Reading
passages a bit faster than you might normally read other texts where you need a deeper understanding of what
you are reading.

© PrepPros 2025

-4-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

