Practice   ACT   #2  Instructions:  Please   print   off   this   practice   ACT   if   you   can   to   simulate   test-day   conditions   and   be   sure   to  follow   the   self-timing   guidelines   strictly.   Do   NOT   give   yourself   a   few   extra   minutes   to   finish  any   sections   of   the   test.   If   you   run   out   of   time,   guess   just   like   you   would   on   test   day.  You   can   find   the   self-timing   sheets   in   the   “Welcome   To   The   Ultimate   ACT   Course”   Course   in  the   lecture   titled   “Download   Practice   ACTs   +   How   To   Best   Use   Them.”   If   you   are   approved  for   extended   time,   use   the   extended   timing   sheets.   Otherwise,   use   normal   time.  Ideally,   it   is   best   to   take   your   practice   tests   in   the   morning   at   8:30am   to   simulate   test   day  (you   will   arrive   at   8:00am   on   test   day,   but   you   will   most   likely   not   actually   start   the   test  until   closer   to   8:30).   Take   the   practice   test   in   a   quiet   environment   without   interruptions.  Scoring:  Once   you   have   completed   this   practice   ACT,   you   can   use   the   answer   key   at   the   back   of   this  test   to   score   your   answers.   You   can   then   use   the   scoring   table   at   the   back   to   find   your  scores.   You   will   get   a   score   1-36   for   each   section   (English,   Math,   Reading,   Science).   Your  composite   score   is   an   average   of   your   4   section   scores   rounded   to   the   nearest   whole  number.

1eBeee  eee  ee  ENGLISH  TEST  45   Minutes—75  Questions  DIRECTIONS:   In   the   five   passages   that   follow,   certain  words  and  phrases  are   underlined  and  numbered.  In  the   right-hand  column,  you  will  find  alternatives  for  the  underlined  part.  In  most  cases,  you  are  to  choose  the  one  that  best  expresses  the  idea,  makes  the  statement  appropriate  for  standard  written  English,  or  is  worded  most  consistently  with  the  style  and  tone  of  the  passage  as  a  whole.  If  you  think  the  original  version  is  best,  choose  “NO  CHANGE.”  In  some  cases,  you  will  find  in  the   right-hand  column  a  question  about  the  underlined  part.  You  are  to  choose  the   best  answer  to  the  question.  You  will  also  find  questions  about  a  section  of  the  pas-  sage,  or  about  the  passage   as  a  whole.  These  questions  do  not  refer  to  an  underlined  portion  of  the  passage,  but  rather  are  identified  by  a  number  or  numbers  in  a  box.  For  each  question,  choose  the  alternative  you  consider  best  and  fill  in  the  corresponding  oval  on  your  answer  document.  Read  each   passage  through  once  before  you  begin  to  answer  the  questions  that  accompany  it.  For  many  of  the   questions,  you  must  read  several  sentences  beyond  the  question  to  determine  the  answer.  Be  sure  that  you   have  read  far  enough  ahead  each  time  you  choose  an  alternative.  PASSAGE   |  A   Mouthful   of   Music  Mouth   music   is   the   name   given   in   English   to   the   many  ways   by   imitating   the   sounds   of   musical   instruments   with  1  the   human   voice.   Forms   of   mouth   music   are   performed  around   the   world,   but   the   genre   being   particularly   popular  in   England,   Ireland,   and   Scotland   fis   this   Celtic   region,  lilting  and  jigging  are  wo  of  the  lively  names  used  to  refer  to   this  musical  form. Celtic  mouth  music  exists  to  accompany  dancing,  so   the  rhythms   and   sounds  are.  first-class  and  the  words  take   a  back  seat.  3  Instead  of   using  traditional  lyrics,  singers   often  produce   nonsense  syllables,  called   vocables  to  represent   specific  instrumental   sounds,  such  as  those  of   bagpipes  or  violins.  The  results  are  songs  that   rarely  make  literal  sense  but   nevertheless  flow  in  a  way  easier   to  dance  to.  s  NO   CHANGE  with  of  at  NO   CHANGE  +  was  being  SEOM SOEP  Is  DELETE  the  underlined  portion.  NO   CHANGE  more  important  than  the  lyrics.  a  bigger   deal   than  the  words.  way  more  vital  than  verse.  NO   CHANGE  syllables   called   vocables,  syllables,  called   vocables, syllables  called,  vocables,  >  SmOm pope  NO   CHANGE  easily  that  is  easy  DELETE  the  underlined  portion. SoE>  GO   ON   TO   THE   NEXT   PAGE.

Tee   Be   eee ew   et  One  Scottish  form  of  mouth  music,  puirt-a-beul,  is  performed   entirely   in   the   Gaelic   language   and   accompanies  traditional  dance  steps,  The  often  tongue-twisting  lyrics  ‘  require  much  practice  to  perfect.  The  greater  challenge  for  many  puirt-a-beul  singers,  though,  is  learning  when  to  7  breathe,  A  poorly  timed  breath  might  break  a  song's  flow,  interrupting   the  Steady  beat  it  relies  on  to  help  ¥  time  their   steps.  []  Instruments  were.   prohibitively  expensive  and  thus   scarce   in   isolated   Scottish   villages   in   order   to   fill  the   void,   mouth   music   emerged   and   provided   residents  with   the   music   they   wanted   for   dancing.   Additionally,  Puirt-a-beul   gave   anyone   whomever   didn’t   read   music  a   way   to   learn   and   pass   on   traditional   songs.  The   continuing   popularity   of   Celtic  mouth   music  is  testament  to  the  vitality  of  them.  In   the   1990s,   groups   like   Mouth   Music   from   Scotland  and   The   Cranberries   from   Ireland   rose   to   fame,  exposing   with   audiences  Celtic  mouth  music   worldwide.  —ereooee  SO  ACT.COt  12,  13:  6.  If  the   writer  were  to  delete  the  underlined  portion,  the  sentence  would  primarily  lose:  F.  a  description  that  emphasizes  the  difficulty  of  uirt-a-beul,   a”  -  .  G.  information  about  writing  lyrics  for  puirt-a-beul  music.  :  ,  H.  an  indication  of  how  often  puirt-a-beul  is  per-  formed  in  the  Celtic  culture,  ‘   :  J.  an  example  of  a  training  exercise  puirt-a-beul  singers  use  to  practice  lyrics.  7.  A.  NO  CHANGE  B.  at  the  same  time,  »   this   time,  still,  .  dancers  rely  |.   they   rely  J.  relied  Cc  D.  8.  FE.  NO  CHANGE  G  HL.  9,   Given   that   all   the   following   statements   are   true,   which  one,   if   added   here,   would   most   effectively   introduce  the   subject   of   the   paragraph? A.  Puirt-a-beul  was  most  likely  invented   out  of  necessity.  B.  Mouth  music  singers  must  have  a  good  sense  of  rhythm.  C.  Celtic  mouth  music,   including  puirt-a-beul,  has  influenced   jazz  scat  singing.  D.  Another   form  of  mouth  music  that  originated  in  Scotland  is  the  waulking  song. 10.  F.  NO   CHANGE  G,  villages  and  in  H.  villages.   In  J.  villages,  in  A.  NO   CHANGE  B.  which C.  whom  D.  who  F.  NO  CHANGE  G,  this  musical   form.  H.  itself.  J.  one.  i‘  NO   CHANGE  -  exposing   audiences   worldwi  i  eras  Tldwide  to  Celtic  mouth  eee  iences  worldwide   exposing  Celtic  mouth  D.  worldwide   exposing  Celtic  mouth   music  audiences,  *  GO   ON   TO   THE   NEXT   PAGE.

The  bands’  celebrity  continually   survives  as  they  ae  combine  traditional  mouth  music  with  modern  rhythms.  sas  ar  nodern  rhythms.  GI  14.  F.  ?  ill  remain:  H.   coe  .s  sticking  arou!  J.  endures  m  the  choices  are  accurate,  which  =  re  on  conse  the  idea  Oat  the  ba  r  fate  both  ‘classic  Celtic  music  and  current  in,  into  their  music?  ANGE  .  ;  a  piel  oie  to  produce  New  MUSIC  and  Teleage  .  album: oncerts   around  the  world.  D.  Lea  and   dance  on  stage.  PASSAGE  I  Making  the   Desert  Bloom  More  than  two   thousand  years   ago,  a  people  the  Romans,  called  the  Garamantes,  created  a  complex  civilization  in  ae  of  the  world’s  driest  places—the  Sahara  Desert.  Beginning   around  500  BCE.  they  built  towns  and  villages,  cloth  was  manufactured  there  and  jewelry,  and  traded   throughout   North   Africa   and   the   Mediterranean.  They   also   grew   a   variety of   crops,   including   wheat,  ‘The   survival   of   their   civilization   depended   on  hundreds   of   miles   of   underground   tunnels. These   tunnels  carried   water   to   desert   settlements   from   an   aquifer,   an  16.  F.  NO   CHANGE  G.  Romans  called  the  Garamantes,  H.  Romans  called:  the  Garamantes  J.  Romans  called   the  Garamantes  NO   CHANGE  B.  the  manufacture  of  cloth  took  place  C.  manufactured  cloth  D.  cloth  18.   If   the   writer   were   to   delete   the   preceding   sentence, the  paragraph   would   primarily   lose   a   concluding   statemeat  that:  LA   a   is   the   Garamantes   ae   successful   farmers  in  they  grew  a  variety  o!  je)  G.   summarizes  the  joformatian  preorised  about  the  Garamantes.  H.   indicates   the   products   that   the   Garamantes  exported  to  Rome.  ’  J.   takes   the   focus   off   the   Garamantes and   places   itm  the  products  they   imported. 19,  Which  choice   provides  new  information  to  the  essay?  A.  NO   CHANGE  z  |.  upon   which  they  depended.  C.   used   by  the  Garamantes,  D.  a  key  to   their   survival.  20.   Which   choice   best   indicates   the   method   used   to   bail  the   tunnels?  F._NO  CHANGE  BL.  aimiy  tie  J.   desert  GO   ON   TO   THE   NEXT   PAGE  cs  |

When   the   tunnels   reached   a   town   or   field,   the   water   flowed  into   more   easy   accessible   surface   canals   or   reservoirs.   21.   A.   NO   CHANGE  a1   B.   more   easily  C.   easier   and  D.   easy   and  Having   left   no   clues,   archaeologists   don’t   know   how   22.   F.   NO   CHANGE  22   G.   A   genuine   puzzle   to   scientists,   archaeologists  the   Garamantes   learned   to   build   foggaras.   Other   such   H.   Giving   no   indication,   archaeologists  J.  Archaeologists  tunnels   existed   in   Iran,   Algeria,   Tunisia,   and   elsewhere.  Because   the   canals   were   underground,   the   water   they  carried   stayed   clean   and   didn’t   evaporate.   And   because   the  water   came   from   an   aquifer   rather   then   from   its   rainfall,   23.   A.   NO   CHANGE  3   B.   than   from  the   supply   was   unaffected   by   drought.   The   Garamantes   D   phen  »   bY  could   of   relied   on   a   constant   supply   of   water   for   drinking,   24.   F.   NO   CHANGE  G.   had   to   of   relied  H.   could   rely  J.  relies  washing,   and   irrigation.   Moreover,   the   cold,   damp   air   of   25.   A.   NO   CHANGE  35   B.   Nevertheless,  the   foggaras   lowered   the   temperature   inside   the   homes   C.   In   contrast,  D.   Even   so,  that   were   built   over   them,   resulting   in   an   ancient   form   of  air-conditioning.  26.   F.   NO   CHANGE  The   Garamantes   who   thrived   until   about   500   CE,   G.   many   of   whom  26   H.   having  .   DELETE   th   derlined   portion.  when   some   archaeologists   believe   they   began   to   deplete   J   ©   underlined   Porton  oo   27.   A.   NO   CHANGE  the   aquifer.   As   the   foggaras   supplied   less   and   less   water,   B.   Astowhen  C.   Whereas  D.   Though  the   Garamantes’   population   declined,   their   civilization   28.   F.   NO   CHANGE  38   G.   declined   the   Garamantes’  eventually   collapsed.   However,   at   least   six   hundred   of   the   H.   declined.   Their  J.  declined  their  ancient   foggaras   survive.   The   stone   mounds   that   mark  their   ventilation   shafts   are   still   visible   in   what   is   now  southwestern   Libya,   where   they   can   be   seen   even   now.   29.   A.   NO   CHANGE   .   ;   ;  29   B.   aplace   where   visitors   can   see   these   amazing   signs  of   an   ancient   civilization.  C.   the   location   that   continues   to   present   visitors   with  a   view   of   these   remnants   of   a   time   gone   by.  D.   DELETE   the   underlined   portion   and   end   the   sen-  tence   with   a   period.  ACT-COt   5   GO   ON   TO   THE   NEXT   PAGE.

Oe  ne  ee  Question   30   asks   about   the   preceding   passag,  as   a  whole.  he  writer's  prliieny,  parnose  had  be,  i  i  vilization’s  eff  formation  about  a  ci  effory  Prereome  a  natural  obstacle  in  order  to  survive,  Wo"  |  this  essay  accomplish  that  purpose?  Wout  4  se  i  ins  that  the  Garamantes  trag  r.  .s,  because  it  explains  I  :  |  %  aeaghons  North  Africa  and  the  Mediterranean,  G.   Yes,  because  it  describes  the  Garamantes’  m  of   bringing  water  to  an   otherwise  dry  area,  allow.  ing  the  Garamantes  to  thrive   there.  H.  No,   because  the  foggaras  were  not  naturally  ogg.  ring  tunnels.  .  di  No.  because  the  foggaras   ultimately  led  to  the  downfall   of  the  Garamantes’  civilization,  30.  Suppose  t  PASSAGE  III  Neutrinos  on  Ice  At  the  IceCube  Neutrino   Observatory  in  Antarctica,  eighty-six  cables  descend  2,500  meters  down  into  the  31.  A.  NO   CHANGE  2  B.  down  below  glacial  terrain.  Each  cable  is  equipped  with  sixty  digital  C.  downwards  D.  DELETE  the  underlined  portion,  optical  modules  (DOMs),  which,  are  programmed,  to  32.  F_  NO   CHANGE  ey  er  a  pe  G.  (DOMs),  which  are  programmed  detect  a  faint  blue  flash  known  as  Cherenkov  radiation.  H.  (DOMs):  which  are  programmed  J.  (DOMs);  which  are  programmed  This  radiation:  a  veritable  shock  wave  of   photonic  33,  A.  NO   CHANGE  cS  B.  radiation—  energy—is  emitted  when  subatomic  particles  called  C.  radiation;  D.  radiation  neutrinos  collide  with  electrons  in  the  molecules   of  ice.  Although  there   are  countless   neutrinos  in  the  universe  (fifty  trillion  neutrinos   pass  through  your  body  34.  IF  the  writer  were  to  delete  the  underlined  portion  =  Mu  Ol  dates  (adjusting  the  punctuation  as  needed),  the   essay   would  every   second),   actually   detecting  them  is  a  formidable  primarily  lose  information  that:  ye  Seale   ste  F.  specifies  why  neutrinos  are  practically  weightless.  task.  Neutrinos  carry  no  electrical  charge,  are   practically  =  explains  how  neutrinos   pass  through  matter.  weightless,  and  travel  at  nearly   the  speed   of  light.  »  indicates  why  there   are  so  many  neutrinos.  J,  emphasizes  how  numerous  neutrinos  are.  Neutrinos  are   rarely   affected  by  matter   or  electromagnetic  fields.  For  this  purpose,  many  neutrinos  have   been  35.   A.  NO   CHANGE  see  =  B.  In   contrast, traveling  through   space  unimpeded  for   billions  C.  Besides  of  years.  r  nee  6  GO   ON   TO   THE   NEXT  PAGE:

Teeeeeeee ai  On  some  ovcasions  however;  neutrinos  do  collide  »  with  other  particles.  [37]   Scientists   specifically  selected  the   site   of   the   IeeCube   Neutrino   Observatory   to   facilitate  the   detection   of   such   a   collision,   Not   ony   is   the   Antarctic  subterranean  ice  exceptionally  clear,  it  is  also  less  pressurized   due   to   it’s   subzero   altitude.   These   factors  increase   the   chance   of   DOMs   detecting   the   blue   flash  that  signifies  a  neutrino  collision.  Once  this  detection  occurs,  data  is  gathered   and  transferred  to  laboratories  at  the  University  of   Wisconsin.  Here,  the   origin  of   each  of   these  neutrinos  is  determined   by  analyzing  the   direction  «  and  intensity  of  the  flash.  Determining  neutrinos”   origins  could   provide  4  scientists  with  new  insights  into  the   universe.  For  instance,  a  some  neutrinos   are  produced  during   supernovae  (the  ns   of  these   neutrinos   could  collapsing  of  stars).  The  ori  a  36.  37.  38.  39.  41,  42.  F.  NO   CHANGE  G._   occasions,   however,  H.  occ  .  however;  J.  occasions,  however  At  this  point,  the   writer  is  considering  adding  the  fol-  lowing  true  sentence:  In  1956,  during  the  Cowan-Reines  neutrino  experiment,  a  neutrino  was  detected  for  the  first   time.  Should  the  writer  make  this  addition?  A.  Yes.  because  the  information  is  relevant  to  the  history  of   neutrino  detection   outlined  in  the  paragraph.  B.   Yes,  because  the  information  indicates  that  subzero  altitude  is  essential  to   the  detection  of  neutrinos.  C.   No,  because  the  information  is  unrelated  to  the  discussion  of  why  scientists  selected  the  location  of  the  IceCube  Neutrino  Observatory.  D.  No,  because  the  information  is  unrelated  to  why  the  detection  of  neutrinos  is  facilitated  by  zero-  gravity   conditions.  F,   NO   CHANGE  G.   Observatory,   and   to  H.   Observatory.   To  J.  Observatory;  to  A.   NO   CHANGE  B.  their  C.  its  D.  its’  F.  NO  CHANGE  G.  have   been  H.   are   being  J.  are  Which  of  the  following  true  sentences  best  introduces  the   main   idea   of   the   paragraph? A.  NO   CHANGE  B.   For  decades,  scientists  have   been  trying  to  learn  more  about  gamma  rays  through  the  study   of  supernovae.  C.   Recently,  at  IceCube,  scientists  discovered  two  neutrinos,  which  they  now  refer  to  as   Bert  and  Ernie.  D.  Neutrinos   can  now  be   created  in  laboratories,  using   a  particle  accelerator   called  a  Super  Proton  Synchrotron.  F.  NO   CHANGE  G._  stars)  and  the  H.  stars),  the  J.   stars)   the  GO   ON   TO   THE   NEXT   PAGE.

jee  eee  ey  "   5  y.  when,  and  wh:  43.  A.  NO   CHANGE  give  us  opulent  information  about  how,  when,  and  why  B.  invaluable  2  imisti  t  the  neutrinos  C.  upscale stars   collapse.   Scientists   are   optimistic   tha   D.   lavish  detected  at  IceCube  could  lead  to  new   ways  of  looking  at  our  galaxy—and  galaxies  beyond.  44.  The  writer  wants  to  emphasize  that  information “  nered  from  the  detected  neutrinos  at  IceCube  have  dramatic  effects  on  how  scientists  stud  the  wa  verse.   Which   choice   best   accomplishes   that   goal?   Uni.  NO   CHANGE   ;  +  phenomena  that  have   puzzled  scientists  OVEF  the  last   decade.   i  |.   common   occurrences   in   space.  the   world   around   us.  Rar.  =z an =  Question  45  asks   about  the  preceding  Passage  as  a   whole.  45.  Suppose  the   writer’s  primary   purpose  had  been  to  out.  line  a  scientific  theory  concerning  the  origins  of  a  par-  ticle  in  nature.  Would  this  essay   accomplish  that  goal?  A.  Yes,  because  it  explains  how  scientists   are  discoy-  ering  new  reasons  why  neutrinos   emit  a  blue  flash  known  as  Cherenkov  radiation.  Yes,  because  it  summarizes  how  DOMs  at  the  IceCube  Neutrino  Observatory  track  neutrinos  to  their  origins   despite   neutrinos’  numerous  colli-  sions  with   matter  and  electromagnetic  forces,  C.   No,   because  it  describes  instead  how  neutrinos  are  detected  at  an   observatory  and  how  these  detec-  tions  could  benefit  future  scientific   research.  D.   No,   because  it  details  instead  how  new  research  on  neutrinos  could  potentially   contradict  a  commonly  held  theory  about   supernovae.  PASSAGE   IV  Clinton   Hill’s   Found   Artist  ti)  At   the   Urban   Vintage,   my   favorite   café   here   in  Clinton  Hill,  Brooklyn,  I  found  a  table  by  the  window  and   checked  the  day’s  news  on  my  laptop.  On  the  New   York   Times   home   page,   I   noticed   an   article   about  Rafael  Leonardo  Black,  a  64-year-old   Clinton  Hill  artist  who  had  just  been  discovered.  [A]  46.  F.  NO   CHANGE  ry  G.   of  whom H.   which  J.  whom  AcT-cot  8  GO   ON   To   THE   NEXT   PAGE   ]

[  Black,  a  native  of  Aruba,   has  been  creating  art  in  his  2]  New  York  City  itudio  apartment  for  over  three  decades.  Until  recently,  few  people  had  seen  his  work.  I  wondered  why—and  learned  he  simply  never  cared  to  share  it.  Black  has  worked  as  a  typist,  a  salesperson,  and  a   receptionist.  He   never   expected   (or   tried)   to   make   a   living   as   an   artist,  However,   in   May   of   2013,   art   dealer   Francis   Naumann,  directed   to   Black's   art   by   one   of   Black’s   longtime   friends,  displayed   sixteen   of   the   artist’s   drawings   in   a   solo   show.  ry  Within   days,  ten  of  Black’s  pieces   sold  for,  prices  ranging  o  from   $16,000   to   $28,000.   [B]  Bl  Black   draws   collages   in   black   No.   2  pencil   on   white   board   and   they're   packed   with  30  depictions,   in   the   form   of   drawings, of   ancient   myths,  historical   events,   a   popular   culture.   I   found   a   collage  titled  Seven  Lamps  in  a  quick  search  online.   [C]  It  features   a   representation   of   a   British   psychedelic   poster,  a   portrayal  of   Danish  surrealist   painter,  Wilhelm  Freddie,  a  at  work,  and  a  tiny   figure  of  Los   Angeles  architect  Simon  Rodia.  The  images  are   stacked,  forming  a   surreal   tower.  ACT.cor  48.  49.  50.  51.  52.  SoSp  i   ne   oe   oe   oe  NO   CHANGE  originally   from   Aruba,   for   more   than   half   his   life  living  in  Clinton  Hill  but  a  native  of  Aruba, a  newly  found  artist  originally  from  Aruba,  Given   that   all   the   choices   are   accurate,   which   one   pro-  vides   the   best   transition   to   the   information   in   the   fol-  lowing   sentence?  F.   NO   CHANGE  G.   was   taking   down   an   artist’s   long-running   exhibi-  tion   at   his   Manhattan   gallery.  H.   became   aware   that   Black   had   never   shown   his  drawings,   formally   or   otherwise.  J.  recognized  that  no   one  in  the  New  York  City  art  world   had   heard   of   Black.  A.  NO   CHANGE  B.  sold—for  C.   sold;   for  D.   sold   for:  F   NO   CHANGE  G._  board.  They're  H.  board,  they're  J.   board   they’re  A.  NO   CHANGE  B.  black  pencil  drawings  that  depict  C.   drawings  that  create  collages  of  D.  depictions  of  F.  NO   CHANGE  G.  painter  Wilhelm  Freddie,  H.  painter,  Wilhelm  Freddie  J.  painter  Wilhelm  Freddie  GO   ON   TO   THE   NEXT   PAGE.

eee  oe  ee  ee,  T  wasn’t  sure  how  the  drawings  in  Seven  Lamps—so  detailed  that  |  could  see  the   folds  in  Rodia’s  clothing  —fit  n  together  logically,  but  I  liked  that  there  was  so  much  for  ui  me   to   puzzle   over.   Maybe   this   complexity  a  in   May   helps   explain   why   Black’s   work   created   such   a   stir.  as  {4]  Tread  that  Black  obs  es  the  sudden  interest  in  his  drawings.  [D]  He  says  he’s  always   been  an  artist,  regardless  of  who  knew  it.  Given  that  I  know  the  city,  PIL  7  keep  checking  the  Times  for  word  of  his  next  show.  When  I  walk  home  from  the  Urban  Vintage,  its  décor  often  being  ee  updated   with  restored   antiques  and  vintage  housewares,  |  cL  LSS  wonder  if  I'll  pass  the  brownstone  building   where,   Black,  »  creates   his   fascinating,  newly   found  art.  ACT.Cot   10  $3.  56.  57.  58.  NO   CHANGE  A.  C  B.  has  fit  Cis  fit  D.  fits  to  delete  the   underlined  .   If   the   writer   ware   radon   as   needed),   the   essay   wo  (adjusting   the  pun  primarily  lose  &  i  that  the  reason  Naumann  ch  rR  oe  a  js  that  the  art  offers  so  much  ft  viewer  to  reflect  upon   and  analyze,  detail  indicating  that  the  aes  appreci  Black’s   collage  even  though  he  or  she  might  po,  have   understood  its  overall  intent.  H.  comment  suggesting  that  though  the  nara  enjoys  only  some  of  Black's  art,  he  or  she  is  gj  that  Black  has  been  discovered,  :  :  J.  statement   revealing  the   narrator's  belief  that  the  best  modern  art  is  understood  only  by  the  artis:  who  created  it  G.  .  The  best  placement  for  the  underlined  portion  would  be:  where  it  is  now.  after  the  word   Maybe.  after  the  word  explain.  D.  after  the  word  stir  (and   before  the  period).  A.  B.  c  The  writer  wants  to  clearly   establish  that  the   news-  paper  article  claims  Black  is  unmoved  by  the   sudden  satan  in  his  art.  Which  choice  best  accomplishes  that  goal?  F.   NOCHANGE  G.   is   nearly   a   celebrity   in   Clinton   Hill   due   to  H._  has  benefited  financially  from  J.   gives   little   thought   to  Which   choice   provides   the   most   effective   transition  from  the  preceding   sentence  to  this  sentence?  A.  NO   CHANGE  B.   Since   I'm  knowledgeable  about  art  and  books.  C.  Now  that  I  know  about   him,  D.  Knowing  that  I  like  news,  E   RO   CHANGE  +  Vintage,  easily  carrying  my  lightweight  laptop *  wy  old,  navy  blue   mibasenEer  pis  -  |  Vintage  this  evening—I  can’t  be  late  to  meet  #  friend  exactly  at  eight—  Vintage  tonight,  NO   CHANGE  building  where   Black  building,  where   Black  building:  where   Black  bal  POFPr  GO   ON   To   THE   NEXT   PASE

aeoeaeeeneer &  Question  60  asks   about  the  preceding  passage  as  a   whole.  60.  The  writer  is  considering  adding  the  following  sen-  tence  to  the  essay:  Fortunately,  the  web  page  included  a  key  that  identified  the  people,  places,  and  events—  most   of  which  I  had  never  even  heard  of—that  Black  portrays  in   this  piece.  If  the  writer  were  to  add  this  sentence,  it  would  most  logically  be   placed  at:  F.  Point  A  in  Paragraph  1.  G..  Point  B  in  Paragraph  2.  H.  Point  C  in  Paragraph  3.  J.  Point  D  in  Paragraph  4.  PASSAGE   V  Cher   Ami,   Pigeon   Hero  Pigeons   have   a   fairly   poor   reputation.   In   many  urban   areas,   they   are   considered   little   more   than,  a  “rats  with   wings,”  blamed  for  spreading  disease  and  despoiling  statues.  For   example,   one  species,  the  homing  |  pigeon,  which  is  among  the  best  navigators  of  the   natural  world.  There  navigational  ab  «  pigeon  an  undeniable  place  in  history.  has  earned  the  homely  61.   A,   NO   CHANGE  B.   than—  Cc.  than;  D.   than  62.   F.   NO   CHANGE  G._   wings”   and   they   are   blamed  H.   wings,”   they   are   blamed  J.  wings.”  Blamed  63.   A.   NO   CHANGE  B.   Similarly,  C.   However, D.  Thus, 64.  F.  NO   CHANGE  G.  pigeon  that  H.   pigeon,  J...  pigeon 65.  A,  NO   CHANGE  B,   They're  Cc.  Its  D.   Its  "   GO   ON   TO   THE   NEXT   PAGE,

oo  Teepe  8   8  ey  Former  modern  technologies  like  the  radio  or  cy  telephone,  commanders  on  the  battlefield  often  faced  challenges  in  communicating,   depending   on  their  location.  :  «  One  solution  was  to  use  homing  Pigeons  to  carry  messages  from  the  front  lines  back  to  headquarters.  The  pigeon  was  a  particularly  good  soldier  in  such  endeavors;  It  flew  fast.  It  flew  high.  And  it  always  quickly  returned  and  came  back  to  its  home  roost.  .  The  most  famous  avian  war  hero  is  perhaps  Cher  Ami,  whose   name   means   dear   friend.   One   of   six   hundred   birds  used   by   the   US   Army   Signal   Corps   in   France   during  World   War   I,   all   twelve   of   Cher   Ami’s   missions   were  deemed   successful.   His   last   was   Fantrupental   in   saving  hundreds  of  lives.  Near  Verdun,  France,  the  77th  Infantry  Division  became  separated  from  US  forces.  The  men  were  surrounded   by  German  troops  and   were  rapidly  running  out  of  rations.  They  were  separated  from  other  US  forces.  70  They  had  but  one  link   to  headquarters  homing  pigeons.  7  It  was   becoming  clear  that  the  Americans   were   unaware  2  :  of  the   77th’s  whereabouts,  the   situation  grew  dire.  12  66.  67.  68.  1.  72.  “| 4  us  4  F,  NO  CHANGE  4  G.  Before  H.  Earlier  J.  Prior  The  writer  is  considering  revising  the  underlined  por-  tion  to  the  following:  7  especially  across  long  distances  and  difficult  terrain.  ‘  ieee,  Should  the  writer  make  this  revision?  A.  Yes,  because  it  offers  a  better  indication  of  the  cir.  .  cumstances  that  made  communication  difficult.  Yes,   because  it  more  clearly  identifies   the  loca.  B.  tions  of  and  distances  between  troops.  C.  No,  because  it  adds  information  that  is  irrelevant  *  fo  the  paragraph’s   discussion  of  pigeons.  D.  No,   because  it  suggests  that  homing  pigeons  are  unnecessary  today.  F.  NO   CHANGE  J  speedily  returned,  coming  home  H.  returned  home  J.  returned  NO   CHANGE  the   twelve   missions   Cher   Ami   flew   were   successful.  successful   missions   by   Cher   Ami   numbered  twelve,  Cher   Ami   flew   twelve   successful   missions. F.  NO  CHANGE  German  troops  were  all  around  them.  They   would  soon   be  out  of  rations.  J.  DELETE  the  underlined  portion.  NO   CHANGE  headquarters:  headquarters;  headquarters,  F.  NO  CHANGE  Having   become As  it  became  J.  It  became  GO   ON   TO   THE   NEXT   PAGE.

pee  ee   eee   ee  Major   Whittlesey   wrote   a   note   about   the   77th’s   location,  placed  it'in  a  canister  attached  to  the  pigeon’s  leg,  and  watched  as   the   bird  flew  out  in  the  midst   of  battle.  Despite  being  wounded  in   flight,  Cher  Ami  managed  to  deliver  the  message  to  headquarters;  the  unit  known  as  “the  Lost  Battalion”  would  be  rescued.  News  reports  around  the  world  touted  the  bird's  heroism.  The  French  military  awarded  Cher  Ami  a  medal,  the  War  Cross.  Although   one  might  question  73.  a  NO   CHANGE  medal,  it  was  the  medal,  that  was  medal.   The  the  extent  in  which  Cher  Ami  understood  his  mission,   74,  "4  NO  CHANGE  of  SOM SOFP   to  DELETE   the   underlined   portion.  his  story  proves  that  pigeons  are  unique.  75.  Which  choice  best  concludes  the  sentence  and  essay  by  B  connecting  Cher   Ami’s  story  to  a  specific  idea  raised  in  the  first  paragraph  of  the  essay?  A.  NO   CHANGE  .  is  testimony  to  the  homing  pigeon’s  navigational  skill  and  instinct.  B  C.  has  made  people  reconsider  the   definition  of  heroism.  D.  suggests  that  even  birds  can  be  brave,  END   OF  TEST  1  STOP!  DO   NOT   TURN   THE   PAGE  UNTIL  TOLD   TO   DO  So.  ACT-co1  ae  Ue

2  AAA  A®  MATHEMATICS TEST  60   Minutes—60   Questions  DIRECTIONS:  Solve  each  problem,  choose  the  correct  answer,  and  then  fill  in  the  corresponding  oval  on  your  answer  document.  Do  not  linger  over  problems  that  take  too  much  time.  Solve  as  many  as  you  can;  then  return  to  the   others  in  the  time  you   have  left  for  this  test.  You  are  permitted  to  use   a  calculator  on  this  test.  You  may  use  your  calculator  for  any  problems   you  choose,  but  some  of  the  problems  may  best  be   done  withoy,  using  a  calculator.  Note:  Unless  otherwise  stated,  all  of  the  following  shoulg  be   assumed.  1.  Illustrative  figures  are  NOT  necessarily  drawn  to  scale,  2.  Geometric  figures  lie  ina  plane.  3.  The  word  fine  indicates  a  straight  line.  4.  The   word  average  indicates   arithmetic  mean.  1.  The  parallelogram  below  has  consecutive   angles  with  measures  x°  and  25°.  What  is  the  value  of  x  ?  100 115  130  140  155 AOORP  2.   A   retail   sales   associate’s   daily   commission   during  1   week   was   $30   on   Monday   and   Tuesday   and   $70   on  Wednesday,   Thursday,   and   Friday.   What   was   the  associate’s   average   daily   commission   for   these   5   days?  $50  $51  $54,  $55  $56 Atmos  3.   What   is   the   greatest   common   factor   of   45,   50,   and   84   ?  SoOFP   uBnao  4,   For   what   value   of   x   is   the   equation   2(x ~   12)   +x =   36  true?  KR  4  G.   8  H.  16  J.  20  K.   30  ACT.Co1  a  14  DO   YOUR  FIGURING  HERE.  GO   ON   TO   THE   NEXT   PAGE.

2  5.   A   bag   contains   exactly   22   solid-colored   buttons: 4   red,  6   blue,   and   12   white.   What   is   the   probability   of  randomly   selecting   |   button   that   is   NOT   white?  5  iT  f4  eG 2  Gs 1  D.  55  B   2  “10  6.  On  a  map,  4  inch   represents  12   actual   miles.  Two  towns  that  are  5  inches  apart  on  this  map  are  how  many  actual  miles  apart?  FE  120  G.  60  H.  30  J.  24  K.  12  7.   Caden   had   exactly   45   plants   to   sell.   After   Day   1   of   his  sale,   he   had   exactly   42   plants   left.   After   Day   2,   Caden  had   exactly   39   plants   left.   After   Day   3,   he   has   exactly  36   plants   left.   Assuming   Caden   will   continue   to   sell  plants   at   that   daily   rate,   how   many   of   these   plants   will  he.   have   left   at   the   end   of   Day   6   ?  33  27  24  6  3) PoORP  8.   An   on-demand   movie   service   charges   $5   per   month,  plus   $2   for   each   movie   rented.   Which   of   the   following  equations   models   the   relationship   between   M,   the  number   of   movies   rented   per   month,   and   7,   the   total  monthly   cost,   in   dollars,   for   the   service?  9.   What   are   the   solutions   to   the   quadratic   equation  (2x  +  5)3x-4)=02  A.  -5S  and4  5  4  B.   =>   and   ay  ee   4  Cc.  -Zand  3  5   £  DF  and  —3  3   a  E.  >  and  3  ACT-Co1  AK   REA  DO   YOUR  FIGURING   HERE.  GO   ON   TO   THE   NEXT   PAGE.

2  10.  An  8-inch-by-6-inch  rectangle  is  cut  along  a  diagonal  to  form  2  triangles.  What  is  the  area,  in  square  inches,  of   each   triangle?  BE.   7  G.  12  H.   14  J.   24  K.   48  11.  In  a   class  of  tenth   graders,  no  student  participated  in  more  than  |  of  the  following  extracurricular  activities:  2  the   class  played  in  the  band;  &  sang  in  the  chorus:  a.  :  al.  ig  Played  football;  and  J;   played  baskétball.  What  fraction  of  the  class  did   not  participate  in  any  |  of  these  4  activities?  A  0  Sia 8   FS  12.  What  is  the  smallest  integer   greater  than  V61  ?  1  G.  H.  8  J.  K  13.   In   ABC   shown   below,   sin   C=   $   and   the   length   of  AB   is   6   inches.   What   is   the   length,   in   inches,   of   AC   ?  B  y  c  es  A  AL  V5  B.  V13  Gs  D.   5  BE   9  Aer-co1  16  AANA  AS  DO   YOUR  FIGURING  HERE.  1  GO   ON   TO   THE   NEXT   PAGE:

PAA   RBAAKAA  ADB  f  an  The  table  below  shows  the  first  S  terms  o|  a  arithmetic  sequence,  Which  of  the  following  is  a  general  expression  for  the  ath  term?  Term  position  (n)  |  mth  term  1   1  2   5  3  9  4  13  5  17  FR   2n-1  G.  3n-2  H,   4n-3  J.  Sn=4  K.   6n-5  15.   What   is   the   perimeter,   in   feet,   of   the   figure   shown  below?  gf  fc  7  20 ft  Be  aft  Cc.   70  D.   80   b   J  E.   84   20f  16,   Manuel   estimates   that   2   of   a   pizza   is   left.   Stephen  estimates   that   i   is   left.   They   are   going   to   compromise  for   a   joint   estimate   by   using   the   number   halfway  between   their   2   estimates,   What   is   their   joint   estimate?  G.  §  a.  3  17.   So   far   this   basketball   season,   Sherita   made   46   of   her  first   60   free   throws,   giving   her   a   free-throw   average   of  about   76.7%.   What   is   the   minimum   number   of   free  throws   she   would   need   to   make   from   now   on   in   order  to   have   a   free-throw   average   of   at   least   80%   ?  A.   2  B.   3  Cc.   10  D.   14  E.  20  17  DO   YOUR  FIGURING   HERE.  GO   ON   TO   THE   NEXT   PAGE.

ZAAAAAAAA  AD  18.  Two  functions  are  defined  as  f(x)=2x-1  and  DO   YOUR  FIGURING  HERE,  g(0)  ©  7  +1,  Which  of  the  following  expressions  represents  f(x(x))  ?  Fo   oP  +2e  .  ated  2x74+2  ac  4-442 zome  19.  Data  Set  A  consists  of  the  8  numbers  listed  below  Data  Set  B  consists  of  the  8  numbers  in  A  and  a  9th  number,  which  is  greater  than  90.  How  will  the  mean  and  the  median  of  B  compare  to  the  mean  and  the  median  of  A  ?  62,  76,  76,   80,  82,   87,   94,  96  The  mean  and  the  median  of  B  will  each  be  greater  than  the  mean  and  the  median  of  A  The  mean  and  the  median  of  B  will  each  be  less  than  the  mean  and  the  median  of   A.  The  mean  and  the  median  of  B  will  each  be  the  same  as   the  mean  and  the  median  of  A.  The  mean  of  B  will  be  the  same  as   the  mean  of   A,  and  the  median  of  B  will  be  greater  than  the  median   of   A,  E.  The  mean  of  B  will  be  greater  than  the  mean  of   A,  and  the  median  of  B  will  be  the  same  as   the  median  of  A.  po F >  20.   A   truck   traveling   at   35   mph   has   a   leaky   radiator   that   is  losing   4   fluid   ounces   per   minute.   How   many   miles  will   the   truck   travel   before   the   radiator,   which   held  480   fluid   ounces   when   it   began   to   leak,   is   empty?  RK  13.7  G..   17.5  H.  35.0  J.  70.0  K.   120.0  21.   In   the  standard  (x,y)  coordinate  plane,  what  is  the  midpoint   of  the   line  segment  that  has   endpoints  (5,8)  and  (3,-1)  ?  A.   (-2,-9)  B.   (-1,   7)  b.  (  4-3)  E.  (  8-9)  at  18  GO  ON  TO   THE   NEXT  PAGE:  |

2A  AA  AAA  22.  The  ordered  pairs  (x,y)  in  one  of  the  following  tables  DO   YOUR  FIGURING   HERE.  belong  to  a  linear  function.  Which  one?  aps  DiS  Ts  o}1  0]  0  1  |  0  Ms  |e  2/1   2/0  3/0  3  |  1  S.  x  y  Be  *  y  o|  2  o}o  telat  ae  241   2|4  3/0  2  ||  9  H.  mea  xy  Ca  Ae  |  3  ae  3  |  0  23.  In  AABC  shown  below,  mZA  =  x°,  mZB  =  (2x)°,  mZC  =  (3x)°,  AB=c  inches,  AC=b  inches,  and  BC  =a  inches.  Which  of  the  following  inequalities  correctly  relates   the  side   lengths  of  AABC  ?  (Note:  mZA  denotes  the  measure  of  ZA,  and  AB  denotes   the  length  of  AB.  The  triangle  is  NOT  drawn  to   scale.)  B  A  b  ¢  a<b<c  a<c<b  b<a<c  e<a<b  e<b<a poORP>  |.  What  is  the  slope  of  the  line   that  passes  through  (1,5)  and  (17,7)  in  the  standard  (x,y)  coordinate   plane?  1  =  tad =   ce len ley wilr ol  ACT-00)  19  GO   ON   TO   THE   NEXT   PAGE.

2  25.  The  perimeter  of  a  particular  rectangle  is  36  centimeters.  The  longer  sides  of  the  rectangle  are  each  2  centimeters  longer  than  each  of  the  shorter   sides  of  the  rectangle.  What  is  the  length,  in  centimeters,  of  one  of  the  longer  sides  of  this  rectangle?  A.   8  B..   9:  Cc.  10  D.   18  E..   32  Use   the   following   information   to   answer  questions   26-28.  Winter   Fun   Ski   Resort   sells   only   2   types   of   tickets—adult  and   student.   On   Monday,   the   resort   sold   200   tickets,  1   ticket   to   each   skier.   Of   those   tickets,   25   were   sold   to  first-time   skiers.   When   Alys   skis   the   resort’s   main.run,  her   elevation,   E   feet,   at   any   point   on   the   run   is   modeled   by  the   equation   E   =   Seri   where   1   is   the   number   of   seconds  after   she   begins   skiing   at   the   start   of   the   main   run,  26.   The   resort   collected   a   total   of   $6,000   in   ticket   sales   on  Monday.   The   price   of   an   adult   ticket   is   $50   and   the  price   of   a   student   ticket   is   $25.   How   many   adult   and  student   tickets   were   sold   on   Monday?  adult  —  student  FR  40:  160  G.  80  120  H.  100  100  J.  120  80  K.  160  40  27.  On  Monday,  the   resort  sold  1  ticket  to  each  of  the  8  members  of  the  Herzog  family.  Assume  this  family  is  a  representative  sample  of  all  of  the   skiers  at  the  resort  on  Monday.  How  many  of  the   8  members  of   the  Herzog  family  are  NOT  first-time  skiers?  A.   1  B.   2  Cc.  4  D.   6  E.   7  28.  What  is  Alyssa’s  elevation,  in   feet,  at  the  start  of  the  main  run?  RK  30  G.   300  H.   3,000  J.   30,000  K.   300,000  AcT.cor  20  AQ  DO   YOUR   FIGURING   HERE.  GO   ON   TO   THE   NEXT  PAGE-

2AAKAAAAAAR  29,   One   side   of   square   ABCD   has   a   length   of   18   meters,   A   DO   YOUR   FIGURING   HERE.  certain  rectangle  whose  area  is  equal  to   the  area  of  ABCD  has  a  width   of   6  meters.  What  is  the  length,  in  meters,  of  the  certain  rectangle?  18  BoOPP>   nv   8  .  The  2x2  matrices  A  and  B  below  are  related  to  matrix  C  by  the  equation  C=  2A  -3B.  What  is  matrix  C?  (24)  a(t  E(6  3  ee  a  [2  4  epee  3  x  [$3  is  doing   an   experiment  to  determine   whether  a  high-protein  food  affects  the  ability  of  white  mice  to  find  their  way  through  a  maze.  The  mice  in  the  experimental  group   were  given  the  high-protein   food; the  mice  in  the   control  group   were  given  regular  food.  Jen   then  timed  the  mice  as  they  found  their  way  through  the  maze.  The  table  below   shows  the  results.  Mouse   |  Experimental   Control  number  group   group  1   1   min 46   sec   |   2   min   13   sec  2   2min   2sec   |   |   min   49   sec  3   2   min   20   sec   |   2   min   28   sec  A.  1  min  51  sec  |  2  min  7  sec  5   1   min   41   sec   |   1   min   58   sec  The   average   time   the   mice   in   the   experimental   group took  to   find  their  way  through  the  maze  was  how   many  seconds   less   than   the   average   time   taken   by   the   mice   in  the   control  group?  A,   8  B.   11  c.   13  D,  16  E.   19  GO   ON   TO   THE   NEXT   PAGE.

2  AAAS  AF  32,  In  the  United  States,  phone  numbers  begin  with  a  3-digit   area   code.   Now,   there   are   restrictions   on   some  of   the   digits,   but   in   the   future   more   and   more   area  codes  are  needed,  the  restrictions  may  need  to  be  lifted.   If,   and   when,   there   are   no   restrictions   and   each  of   the   3   d   can   be   any   integer   from   0   through   9,  how   many   area   codes   will   be   possible?  F.   27  G.  30  H.   720  J.  729  K.   1,000  33.   The   function   y   =   2   sin(8rx) is   graphed   in   the   standard  x,y)   coordinate   plane   below.   How   many   x-intercepts  the  graph  of  this  function  have  on  the  interval  O<x<1?  BpORP  34.  If  both  x   and  (4  ba  5  +  Fal  are   positive   integers,  what  is  the  least  possible   value   of  x?  KF   21  G27;  H.   36  J.  63  K.   189  ACT-cO1   22  po   YOUR  FIGURING  HERE,  GO   ON   TO   THE   NEXT   PAG?

AAD 2  Use  the  following  information  to  answer  questions  35-38.  In   parallelogram   ABCD   shown   below,   the   diagonals  intersect.   at   E,   mZBDC =   42°,   mZBDA=71°,   and  AB  =($n—5)  inches.  (Note:   The   figure   is   NOT   drawn   to   scale;   mZPOQR   denotes  the   measure   of   ZPQR.)  t—2n-5—4  .  i D   [ey  A  B  35,   What   is   mZBAD   ?  A.  23°  B.  42°  Cc.   48°  D.   67°  E..   71°  36.   Given   that   DC   =   (4a   +7)   inches,   what   is   the   value  ofn?  Armom   ANDsN 1  3  37.   Suppose   A   and   C   are   located   at   (2,10)   and   (30,3),  respectively,   in   the   standard   (x,y)   coordinate   plane.  What   are   the   coordinates   of E   ?  (3)  38.   Which   of   the   following   triangles   is   congruent   to  AABE   ?  F.   AADC  G.  AAED  H.   ABCE  J.  ABCD  K.  ACDE  te  FS OS, Ol oe   vin  ACT-Cot  23  DO   YOUR  FIGURING   HERE.  GO   ON   TO   THE   NEXT   PAGE.

QPAAAAAAAA  A  39.  Which  of  the  following   expressions  is  equal  to  40.  41.  42.  (a+  Vb)(a  ~  2b)  for  all  positive  real  numbers  a  and   b?  A.  a?  -3aVb  B.  a’-  aVb-2b  C.  a  -  aVb-2V2  D.  a’  ~3aVb  ~   2b  E.  a+  3aVb  -  2  The  track  for  a  model  railroad  display  is  set  up  as  2  circles  that  are  tangent  to  one  another  and  have  diameters   of  30  feet  and   50  feet,  respectively,  as  shown  below.  The  engine   of  the  train  travels  at  a  constant  rate  of   75  feet  per   minute.  To  the  nearest  minute,  how  many  minutes  does  the  engine  take  to  go  ina  figure  8  pattern  around  the   entire  track   exactly  1  time?  Argon   S268  (s)'-»  A  2  What   is   the   value   of   the   positive   real   number   x   such  eae  that  log,  #)  27  Fe  5  50  1  H.  50  1  J.  3  25  K,  =  ACT-Cor  24  po   YOUR  FIGURING  HERE,  GO   ON   To   THE   Next   PAGE

QAAAAKR  AA  AA®  43.   The   points   (—4,-5),   (0,-3),   and   (6,0)   lie   on   a   line   in   DO   YOUR   FIGURING   HERE.  the  standard  (x,y)  coordinate  plane.  Which  of  the  following  points   also  lies  on  that  line?  A.   (-3.-4)  B.   (-1,-4)  CG.  ¢  L=2)  D.  (  4-1)  E..  {  °9,.  1)  44,  Rya   and  Sampath  start  running  laps  from  the  same  starting   line   at   the   same   time   and   in   the   same   direction  on  a  certain  indoor  track.  Rya  completes  one  lap  in  16  seconds,  and  Sampath  completes  the  same  lap  in  28   seconds.   Both   continue   running   at   their   same  respective   rates   and   in   the   same   direction   for  10   minutes.   What   is   the   fewest   number   of   seconds  after   starting   that   Rya   and   Sampath   will   again   be   at  their   starting   line   at   the   same   time?  FB   88  G.  112  H.   120  J.  220  K.   448  45.  The  CFO  of  Math  King  Enterprises  estimates  that  if  the  company  sets  a  price  of  c  cents  for  each  unit  of  their  new  product,   then  the  weekly  profit  from  selling  the  product  will  be  modeled  by  p(c)  =  1,600c  ~  4c",  where   0   <  c  $  400.  According  to  this  model,  for  which  of  the  following  values  of  c  will  the  weekly  profit  for  this  product  be  the  largest?  A.  20  B.  40  Cc.   100  D.  200  E.  400  46.  Given  consecutive  positive   integers  a,  b,  c,  and  d  such  that  a  <b  <c<d,  which  of  the  following   expressions  has  the   greatest  value?  KE  G.  H.  is aio ols sis   +   >  J  K.   i> S| + +   nn  e+d  47.  The  ratio  of  the  perimeters   of  two  squares  is  2:3.  If  the area   of  the   larger  square  is  324  square  feet,  what  is  the  length,  in   feet,  of  the   side  of  the  smaller   square?  A.   12  B.   18  Cc.   24  D..   27 E.   36  25  GO   ON   TO   THE   NEXT   PAGE.

2A  A  48.  What  is  the  set  of  all  integer  solutions  for  the  inequality  -1  sv-   V5   <4?  FE  (3.4,5}  G.  (2,3,4,  5.6} H.  (2,  3,4,  5)  J.  {1,2,3,4,5,  6)  K.  {1,2,3,4,  5)  49.  Wind  blowing  against  a  flat  surface  exerts  a  maximum  force  equal  to  kSv",  where  S  is  the  area  of  the  surface,  v  is  the  wind’s  velocity,  and  k  is  a  constant.  If   a  40  mile-per-hour  (mph)  wind  can  exert  a  maximum  force  of  50  pounds  on  a  1-square-foot  flat  surface,  what  is  the  maximum  force,  in  pounds,  that  an  80  mph  wind  can  exert  on  a  2-square-foot  flat  surface?  A.  100  B.   128  Cc.  200 D.  400  E.   1,600  50.  Roger  will  pour  concrete  to  make  a  sidewalk   with  the  dimensions,  in  feet,  shown  in  the  figure  below.  He  will  pour  the  concrete  to   a  depth   of  4  inches.  One  bag  of  concrete  mix   makes  0.6   cubic  feet  of  concrete.  What  is  the  least  whole  number  of  bags  of  concrete  mix  that  Roger  needs  in  order  to  make  the  sidewalk?  4  Remon   a   So   =  67   20  51.   Radius   OA   of   the   circle   shown   below   is   perpendicular  to   AP.   The   circle   intersects   OP   at   B.   The   length   of   AP  is   12   centimeters,   and   the   measure   of   ZAPO   is   20°.  Which   of   the   following   values   is   closest   to   the   length,  in  centimeters,  of  BP  ?  ie  12  P  B  (Note:  sin  20°  ~  0.342,   cos  20°  ~  0.940,  and  tan  20°   =   0.364)  HONOR   eI ARN paoR-  ACT.Co1  26  AA  AQ  DO   YOUR  FIGURING  HERE.  GO   ON   TO   THE   NEXT   PAGE:

QAA  KA  AK   Ava  2  52.   The   average   of   10   test   scores   is   x,   When   the   highest   DO   YOUR   FIGURING   HERE.  score   and   lowest   score   are   removed   from   the   10   scores,  the  average  is  y.  Which  of  the  following  is  an  expr  n   for  the  average  of  the  highest  score  and  lowest  score?  F.  10x-8y  x+y  G.  =  10x +   8y  aan  10x  ~8y  J.  =  10x  +  8y  Ls   18  53.   Which   of   the   following   is   the   solution   set   of  a7"   =9"-49  A.  {+4  3]  B.   {-,   8}  54.  Each  face  of   2.cubes   with  faces  numbered  from  1  through   6  has  a  t  chance  of  landing  up  when  the  2  cubes  are   tossed.  What  is  the   probability  that  the  sum  of  the  numbers   on  the   faces   landing  up  will  be  less  than  6?  =  gis ale ale ale ale als  Acr-cor  27  GO   ON   TO   THE   NEXT   PAGE.

2  55.  At  2:00  p.m.,  Louisa  leaves  Kansas  City  in  her   car  traveling  east  on  1-70  toward  St.  Louis  at  an  average  speed  of  68  mph.  At  precisely   the  same  time,  Antonio leaves  St.  Louis  in  his  car  traveling  west  on  I-70  toward  Kansas  City  at  an  average   speed  of  57  mph.  The  driving  distance  from  St.  Louis  to  Kansas  City  is  240  miles.  At  what  time,  to  the  nearest  minute,  will  they  drive  past  each  other  on  I-70  ?  A.  3:46   p.m.  ie]  56,  There  are  10   points  in  a   plane,  and  no  3  of  the  points  are  collinear.  These  10  points,  taken  2   points  at  a  time,  determine   how   many   distinct   lines?  FE   10  G.   20  H.   35  J.   45  K.  90  57.   The   expression   n!   (read   as   n   factorial)   is   defined   as  the   product   of   all   positive   integers   up   to   and   including  n,  whenever  n  is  a  positive  integer.  For   example,  4!=1+2+3-+4.  Whenever  n  is  a  positive  integer,  ia  el  ;  (n+  116!  which   of   the   following   is   equivalent   to   —~   737  A.  120(n  +1)  B.   120  err?  p,  2@+D.  n  (6n   +6)!  7  Gre  58.   Which   of   the   following   must   be   true   for   each   set   of  4  consecutive  positive   integers?  I.   Atleast   |   of   the   4   integers   is   prime.  IL.   At   least   2   of   the   4   integers   have   a   common  prime  factor,  Ill.  At  least  1  of  the  4  integers  is  a   factor  of  at least  1  of  the   3  other  integers.  FE.  Lonly  G.  Ionly He  1  and  Ill  only  J.   Mand   I   only  K.  1,0,  and  I  28  ANAK  AR  DO   YOUR  FIGURING  HERE.  GO   ON   TO   THE   NEXT   PAGE:

2  AA  2  59.   When   (x+1)*   is   expanded   and   like   terms   are   DO   YOUR   FIGURING   HERE.  combined,  what  is  the   coefficient  of  x?  ?  Boop   aan-o  60.  A  hill  makes  an  angle  of   20°   with  the   horizontal,  aD,  as  shown  below,  A  taut  guy  wire,  AB,  extends  from  the  base  of  the  hill,  point  A,  to  point  B  on   a  vertical  pole. Point  B  is  25  ft  directly  above  where  the  pole  is  inserted  into   the  ground  at  point   C.  Given  that the  length   of  AC  is  60  ft,  which  of  the  following  expressions  represents  the  length,  in  feet,  of  the  guy  wire?  (Note:  For  a  triangle  with  sides   of   length  a,  b,  and   c   that   are   opposite   angles   ZA,   ZB,   and   ZC,  sinZA  _  sin  ZB  _  sin  ZC  a   b   c  c   =a’   +b?   —2ab   cos   ZC.)  respectively,  and  25   sin   60°  sin   20°  25   sin   70°  sin   20°  25   sin   110°  sin   20°  J.   V0"   +   25?   =   2(60)(25)   cos   70°  K.  V/60?  +  25°  —  2(60)(25)   cos  110°  END   OF   TEST  2 STOP!  DO   NOT   TURN   THE   PAGE  UNTIL  TOLD   TO   DO  SO.  DO   NOT   RETURN   TO   THE   PREVIOUS  TEST.  ACT-901  a

READING   TEST  35   Minutes—40  Questions  DIRECTIONS:  There  are  several  passages  in  Each  passage  is  accompanied  by  several  qui  After  reading  a  passage,  choose  the  best  answer  this  test.  estions.  to  each  question  and  fill  in  the  corresponding  oval  on  your  answer  document.  You  may  refer  to  the  passages  as  often   as   necessary.  Passage  |  LITERARY   NARRATIVE:   Passage   A   is   adapted   from   the  essay   “Touring   Home”   by   Susan   Power   (©1996   by   Susan  Power).   Passage   B   is   adapted   from   the   memoir   Beyond   the  Narrow   Gate:   The   Journey   of   Four   Chinese   Women   from   the  Middle   Kingdom   to   Middle   America   by   Leslie   Chang   (©1999  by   Leslie   Chang).  Passage   A   by   Susan   Power  My   mother   tells   me   stories   every   day:   while   she  cleans,   while   she   cooks,   on   our   way   to   the   library,  standing   in   the   checkout   line   at   the   supermarket.   I   like  to   share   her   stories   with   other   people   and   chatter   away  when   I   am   able   to   command   adult   attention. a  “She  left  the  reservation  when  she  was  sixteen  years  old,”  I  tell  my  audience.   Sixteen  sounds  very  old to  me,  but  I  always  state  the  number  because  it  seems  integral   to  my  recitation.  “She  had  never  been   on  a  train  before   or  used   a  telephone.  She  left  Standing  Rock  to  take  a  job  in  Chicago  so   she  could  help  out  the  family  during  the  War.  She   was  so  petrified  of  the  new  sur-  roundings,   she   stayed  in  her  seat  all  the  way  from  McLaughlin,   South   Dakota,  to  Chicago,  Illinois,  and  15   didn’t  move  once.”  I  usually  laugh  after  saying  this  because  I  cannot  imagine  my  mother  being  afraid  of  anything.  She  is  so  tall,  a  true  Dakota  woman;  she  rises  against   the  sun  like  a  skyscraper,  and  when  I  draw  her  picture  in  my  note-  book,   she  takes  up  the   entire  page.  She  talks   politics  and   attends   sit-ins   and   says   what’s   on   her   mind.  20  I   am   her   small   shadow   and   witness.   I   am   the   timid  daughter  who  can  rage  only  on  paper.  We  don’t  have  much  money,  but  Mom  takes  me  from   one  end   of  the  city   to  the   other,  on  foot,  on  buses.  I  will  grow   up  believing  that  Chicago  belongs  to  me, because  it  was  given  to  me  by  my  mother.  2 a  Some  days  we  haunt  the  Art  Institute,  mother   pauses   before  a   Picasso.  blue   period,”   she  tells  me.  and   my  “He  did  this  during  his  T  squint  at  the  blue if   man   holdi   i  ‘Was   he   very   sad?”   I   ask.   olding   a   blue   guitar.  ‘ACT-Cor  30  “Yes,  I  think  he   was.”  My  mother  takes  my  hand  and  looks  away  from  the   painting.  I  can  see  a  sto,  developing  behind  her  eyes,  and  T  tug  on  her  arm  to  release   the  words.  She  will  tell  me  why  Picasso   was  blue,  what  his  thoughts  were  as  he  painted  this  canvas,  She  relates  anecdotes  I  will  never  find  in  books,  never  see  footnoted  in  a  biography  of  the  master  artist.  I  don’t  even  bother  to  check  these  references.  because  I  like  my  mother’s  version  best.  40  Passage   B  by  Leslie  Chang  Water  belongs  to  everyone   and  to  no  one.  For  this  reason,  I  have  always  had  a  particular  affinity  for  it,  which  may  strike  some  as  mysterious.  Westerners  ask  me  where  my  parents  were  born,  as  though  the  answer  will  enable  them  to  glean  some  knowledge.   The  answer  is  Beijing  and   Luoyang.  The  truth  is  that  this  response  signifies  nothing.  The  meaningful  question  would  be  to  ask   where   my   ancestors   lived.   The   answer   to   that   is  inland.   My   father’s   people   came   from   Wuhan,   birth-  place   of   the   Chinese   republic   and   the   capital   of   Hubei,  that   sweltering   province   sandwiched   between   Sichuan  and   Anhui.   My   mother’s   father   was   from   Inner   Mongo-  lia,   land   of   desert   and   grassy   plains.  Yet   water   calls   to   me.   I   remain   convinced   that   I  would   find   peace   if   I   could   only   have   a   house   by   the  ocean.   I   insisted   on   being   married   near   the   sea.   This  bond,  I  know,  comes  from  my  mother.  She  longs  for  a  view  more  than   anything  else.  Once,   staying   at   a   hotel   in   San   Francisco,   she   insisted  on   seeing   three   different   rooms   before   she   found   one  with  which  she  was  satisfied.  It  was  on  a  floor  so  high  it   made   me   dizzy,   with   a   corner   window   overlooking  the   bay.   Even   so,   my   mother   spent   most   of   her   time   0”  the  bridge   linking   the   elevator  bank  to  our  wing.   The  bridge   consisted   almost   entirely   of   windows.   It   offered  a   view   in   either   direction   that   was   brilliant   am  blinding.  If  there  had   been  a   chair,  she   could  have  S#  forever,   letting   the   gold   sun   and   blue   sea   overwhelm   het  70  through  the  glass.  My  mother  may  have   descended   from  inland  people,   but   they   were   also   nomads.   Her   father   07°  rode   his   horse   practically   the   length   of   China.   from  Inner   Mongolia   to   Guangzhou,   a   distance   of   soTM  75   twelve   hundred   miles.   My   mother   could   only   becom   *  GO   ON   TO   THE   NEXT   PAGE-

j  223  eee  3  nomad  herself—forever  moving,  yet  always  retaining  some  essenti  recognizable  and  intact   in   spite  of  been.   In  this,  she  is  like  water,   not  somely  aves  When  she  gazes  ou  expanse,  she  sees  her  own  reflection.  When  I  aze  see  her,  my  mother,  always  pulling  away,  reunuing  etd  pulling  away  again.  I  drink  from  her,  and  she  slips  between  my  fingertips.  She  has  borne  me  all  this  way.  1  cannot  decide  whether  I  want  her  to  stay   or  go.  When  she  is  here,  I  wish  she  would  leave.  When  she  is  gone,  I  wish   she  would  return.  She  pulls  away  again,   a   force   as  elemental  as  the  ebbing  tide.  I  remain  a  child  on  the  shore,  eagerly  collecting  the  i  eee  ig  sea  glass  and  driftwood  changing  and  going,  jal  part  of  her  being,  all  the  places  she   has  dead  water  but  fear-  1t  on  its  shimmering  Questions  1-3  ask   about  Passage  A.  1.   In   Passage   A,   the   narrator   directly   compares   her  mother  to  a:  .  A.   Picasso  painting.  B.  shadow  and  witness.  C.   story   behind   someone’s   eyes.  D.   skyscraper   against   the   sun,  2.   The   narrator   of   Passage   A   most   strongly   suggests   that  the   reason   she   began   to   believe   Chicago   belongs   to   her  is   that   she:  F.   could   eventually   take   several   different   routes   to  travel   from   one   end   of   the   city   to   the   other   without  getting   lost.  had   watched   her   mother   directly   influence   the   pol-  itics  of  the  city.  H.   felt   she   could   move   about   the   city   almost   unseen,  like   a   small   shadow.  J.   initially  explored  the  city  with  her  mother  as  her  affirming   guide,  so  her  connection  to  the  city  seemed  familial.  G.  3.  It  can  most  reasonably  be  inferred  from  Passage  A  that the  narrator  doesn’t   bother  to   verify  that  her   mother’s  ideas  about   Picasso  and  his  work  are   accurate   primar-  ily  because  the  narrator:  doesn’t  know  which  references  would  be  best   for  her  to  consult.  is  confident  that  what  her  mother  says   about  the  artist  is  accurate  and  feels   that  checking  references  would  be  a  waste   of  time.  4   .  doesn’t   care  whether  her  mother  is  accurate   given  how   much  the   narrator  likes  what  her  mother  says  about  the  artist.  .  wants  to  hold  to  her  own  ideas   about   the  artist,  regardless   of   what  her  mother  says   about   him.  ACT-cor  31  Questions  4-7  ask  about  Passage  B.  4.   In   Passage   B,   the   narrator   most   strongly   suggests   that  she  believes  her  answer  to  which  of  the  following  questions  does  not  provide  significant  information  about   her   background?  F.  How  is  your   mother  like  your  other   ancestors?  G.  Where  did  your  ancestors  live?  H.  Where  were  your  parents  born?  J.  Why  does   water  call  to  you?  5.  As  they  are  used  in  Passage  B,  the  word  blinding  (line  68)  and  the  word  overwhelm  (line  69)   both  have  a  connotation  that  most  strongly  suggests  a  feeling  of:  A.  fright.  B.   awe.  C.  regret.  D.   quietness,  6.  In  line  79,   the  word  dead  is  most  nearly  used  to  describe   water   that   is:  F.   colorless.  G._   obsolete.  H.   stagnant.  J.  frozen.  7.   The   last   sentence   of   Passage   B   can   best   be   described   as  a:  A.   metaphor   for   the   narrator’s   feelings   as   her   mother  goes   away   from   her.  B.   memory   of   childhood   and   of   her   mother   that   the  narrator  holds  dear.  C._   literal   explanation   of   the   way   the   narrator   reacts   to  her   mother’s   actions.  D.   reference   to   a   set   of   objects   that   the   narrator   as   a  child   often   found   on   the   shore.  Questions   8-10   ask   about   both   passages.  8.   Which   of   the   following   actions   do   the   narrators   of   both  passages   closely   connect   with   their   mothers?  F.  Traveling  and  moving  G.   Exploring   Chicago   streets  H.   Speaking   openly   and   boldly  J.  Staying  at  hotels  in   cities  9,  The  narrator  of   Passage  B  would  be  more  likely  than the   narrator  of   Passage  A  to  describe   her   relationship  with   her  mother  as  being  marked  b  A.  moments  of  lively  conversation   and  pure  joy.  B.   years   of  fierce  competition   and  debate.  C.   displays   of   physical  affection  and   warmth,  D.  feelings  of   distance  and  tension.  GO   ON   TO   THE   NEXT   PAGE.

33  ee  B  10.  In  both  Passage  A  and  Passage  B,   the  narrator  of  the  passage  shares  information   about  her  mother's:  F.__  personal  history.  G._  physical  appearance.  H.   academic   interests.  J.  relationship  to  the  narrator's  Passage   Il  a  20  25  30  3  40  &  SOCIAL  SCIENCE:  This  passage  is  adapted  from  The  Frozen-  Water  Trade:  A  True  Story  by  Gavin  Weightman  (©:  Gavin   Weightman).   ightman  (©2003  by  __.  When  the  first  comprehensive  report  on  the  ice  industry   of  the  United  States  was   commissioned  in  1879  as   part  of  a  national  census,  it  was  estimated  that  about  eight  million  tons  were  harvested  annually,  though  the  business  was  so  extensive  and  production  $0  poorly  documented  that  this  was,  at  best,   a  well-  informed  guess.  The  figures  were  put  together  by  one  Henry   Hall,   who   signed   himself   “special   agent”   and  gave  an   account  of  the  great  growth  of  the  industry  in  the   preceding   ten   years.   Of   the   eight   million   tons   of   ice  harvested,   about   five   million   reached   the   consumer—  the   rest   melted   during   shipment   and   storage.   By   far   the  biggest   market   was   in   New   York,   and   none   of   its   ice  was   manufactured   artificially:   it   was   all   cut   in   winter  and   stored   in   hundreds   of   timber   warehouses   that   lined  the   lakes   and   rivers   and   had   a   capacity   of   up   to   fifty  thousand   tons   each.   Between   New   York   and   Albany,  150   miles   up   the   Hudson   River,   there   were   135   ice-  houses,  but  even  this  was  not  enough  to  supply  the  metropolis,   which   relied   heavily   on   imports.   In   fact,   in  the  year  of  the   great  ice  census,  New  York  and  Philadel-  phia  suffered  one  of  their  recurrent  ice  “famines,”  when unseasonably  warm  weather  destroyed  the  harvest  on  the  Hudson  and  local   lakes,  and  the   price  of  ice  rose  from   $4  to  $5  a   ton.  That  year  the  ice  was  fifteen  to  twenty  inches  thick  in  Maine,  a  top-quality   crop,  and  it  could   be   shipped  down  to  New  York  at  an   estimated  cost  of  $1.50  a   ton.  This  produced  a  frenzy  of  harvest-  ing  on  the  Kennebec,  Penobscot,  and  Sheepscot  Rivers,  and  two  thousand  cargoes  of  ice  packed  in  hay   and   saw- dust  were  shipped   south  to  New  York,  Philadelphia,  and  other  more  southern  cities,  where  they  were  sold  for  a  total  of  around  $1.5  million.  Though  the  demand  for  ice  rose   annually,  the  New  York  suppliers   did   not   explore  the   use   of  artificial  refrigeration.   Instead,   they   began   to   buy   up   sections   of  the  Kennebec  River  shoreline  and  to  erect  great  wooden  warehouses   there,   transforming   the   landscape   of   the  river   for   many   miles,   It   was   the   same   farther   inland,  where   ice   companies   bought   up   shoreline   along   the  lakes   and   put   up   storehouses   to   supply   the   meat   indus-  try   of   Chicago   and   the   brewers   of   Milwaukee,   as   well  as   millions   of   domestic   consumers.  The  first  real   crisis   in  the   natural-ice   trade  was  45   caused  not  by   competition   from  artificial  manufacture, but  by  pollution,  As  the  cities  grew,   they  encroached   on  ACT.Cot   32  5  5  i  6  8  5  3  5  70  7  8  1  a  0  &  the  rivers  and  lakes  from  which  the  ice  was  cut,  and  soon  there  were  health  scares.  This   produced  a  sear  for  cleaner  suppli  ay  from  towns,  and  stimulated  the  search  for  a  means  of  manufacturing  ice  With  pyre  water,  The  realization  that  the  bacteria  that  cause  dis,  eases  such  as  typhoid  were  not  killed   off  in  frozen  water  added  to  the  urgency  of  finding  safer  forms  of  refrigeration.  The  natural-ice   trade  began  to  decline  from  the  early  decades  of  the  twentieth  century,  though  in  more  remote  areas  of  North  America  where  electric  Power  was  not  available   but   lake  ice  was  abundant  in  winter,  jy  survived  as  late  as  the  1950s.  As  ice  harvesting  died  out,  the  evidence   of  its  former  vast  scale  rapidly  disap-  peared.  There  was   no  alternative  use  for  the  great  ice-  houses,  many  of  which  simply  burned   down,  often  set  alight  by  a  spark  from  a  steam  train—they   were  surpris-  ingly  flammable,  as  most   were  made  of  wood  and  kept  as  dry  as  possible  to  better  preserve  the  blocks  of  ice  they  housed.   But  the  majority  were  demolished  or  simply  rotted  away.  Over  a  wide  area  of  the  northern  states,  young  diving  enthusiasts  with  no  knowledge  of  the  former  ice  trade  still  emerge   from  lakes  and  rivers  clutching  an  impressive  variety  of  odd  implements—plows  and  chis- els  and  scrapers  that  fell  through  the  ice  during  the  har-  vesting.  One  or  two  museums  keep  small  displays  of  these   tools,   and   collectors   have   preserved   manufactur-  ers’  catalogs  that  proudly  present  their  versions  of  the  ice  plow,  the   ice  saw,  the  grapple,  the  Jack  grapple,  the  breaking-off  bar,  the  caulk  bar,  the  packing  chisel,  the  house  bar,  the   fork  bar,  the  float  hook,  the  line  marker,   and   many   other   specialist   implements   the   use  of   which   has   long   been   forgotten.  The  inner-city  icehouses  have  also  gone,   and  the  ice   wagon   and   the   iceman   are   rapidly   fading   memories.  All   that   is   left   in   America   of   this   once-great   industry   is  the   water   itself,   which   provided   a   continuously   renew-  able  supply   of  ice  each  winter,  There  are  few  memorials  on   the   banks   of   the   rivers   and   lakes   that   once   produced  such   a   vital   crop,  Which  of  the  following   events  referred  to  in  the   pas-  sage   occurred  last  chronologically?  A.  The  first  comprehensive  report  on  the  ice   industry  of  the  United  States  was   commissioned.  .  B.   Divers  emerged   from  lakes  and  rivers  clutching  ice  industry  implements.  C.  Two  thousand   cargoes   of  ice  were  sold  for  around  $1.5   million.  D.  The  price  of  ice  rose  from   $4  to  $5   a  ton.  GO   ON   TO   THE   NEXT   PAGE.

rr  12.  The  passage  states  that,  in  ter  industry,  the  decade   from   1869  ized  by: F.  significant  growth.  G.  damaging  publicity,  H.  high  shipping  prices,  J.  mildly   declining  demand.  ms  of  the  natural-ice  to  1879  was  character-  13.  As  it  is  used  in   lines  19—  most  likely  refers  to:  A.  Albany.  B.  New  York  City,  C..  Philadelphia.  D.  the  average  US  city  of  the  1870s.  20,   the  phrase  the  metropolis  14.  Based   on  the  passage,  the  1879  Maine  ice  that  was  fif-  teen  to  twenty  inches  thick  can  best  be   described  as:  F.  a  top-quality  crop  that  was  shipped  to  New  York  City,  Philadelphia,  and  destinations  further  south.  G.  sufficient  for  local  demand  but  not   a  solution  to  the  problem  of  the  ice  “famine”  in  the  South,  typical  of  Maine  crops  of  ice  until  the  ice  “famine”  struck,  .  remarkable  but  surpassed  in  size  and  quality  by  crops  the  following  year.  H.  15,  The   main  idea  of  the   fourth  Paragraph  (lines  55-67)  is  that:  A.  the   natural-ice   industry  declined  over  several  decades,   leaving  few  traces  of  its  magnitude.  B.  the  arrival  of  the  steam  train  signaled  the  demise  of  ice  harvesting. C.   icehouses  were  extremely  flammable   and  therefore  few  remain.  D.  in  the  1950s,  the   natural-ice  industry  experienced  a   short-lived  revival.  ACT-Coy  16.  17.  18.  19.  20.  HS  Geese  3  The  author  most  clearly  indicates  that  the  contents  o!  the  manufacturers’  catalogs  referred   to  in  the  fifth  para-  graph  (lines  68-80)  typify   the   natural-ice   industry's:  F.   rapid   response   to   market   changes.  G.   ability   to   erect   icehouses   quickly.  H.   wide   array   of   tools.  J.   simple   work.  On   which   of   the   following   points   does   the   author   con-  tradict   himself   elsewhere   in   the   passage?  A.   “Of   the   eight   million   tons   of   ice   harvested,   about  five  million  reached  the  consumer”  (lines  10-11).  B.   “The   New   York   suppliers   did   not   explore   the   use  of   artificial   refrigeration”   (lines   34-36).   ,  C.   “There   was   no   alternative   use   for   the   great   ice-  houses”   (lines   61-62).  D.   “All   that   is   left   in   America   of   this   once-great  industry   is   the   water   itself”   (lines   83-84).  According   to   the   passage,   in   the   time   period   referred   to  in   the   first   paragraph,   how   much   of   New   York   City’s  ice  was  made  artificially?  F.  The  vast  majority  G.  About  half  H.  About  ten  percent  J.  None  ‘The  passage  states   that  for  shipping   purposes,  natural  ice  was  sometimes   packed  in:  A.  refrigerated  boxcars.  B.  waterproof  tarps.  C.  sawdust  and  hay.  D.  paper  and  cloth.  The  passage  indicates  that  the  first  real   crisis   in  the  natural-ice  industry  can   be  attributed  to:  F.  the  Great  Depression.  G.  weather  pattern  changes.  H.  the  advent   of  refrigeration.  J.  polluted  water,  GO   ON   TO   THE   NEXT   PAGE.

Passage  Ill  a  15  2 &  45  50  HUMANITIES:  This  passage  is  adapted  from  the  article  “Read  My  Lips”  by  Chiara  Barzini  (©2012  by  the  H;  Pi  My  cies  by  y  jarper’s  Magazine  In  the  passage,  dubbing  primarily  refers  to  providing  a  film  with  a  new  sound  track.  especially   dialogue,  in  a  different  language.  Filmmakers  have  debated  the  respective   merits  of  subtitles  and   dubbing  since  the  earliest  sound  films.  In  “The  Impossible  Life  of   Clark  Costa,”  published  in  1940  in  the   film  journal  Cinema,  director  Michelangelo  Antonioni  wrote  that  Romolo  Costa,  the  person  who  dubbed  all  of  actor  Clark  Gable's   performances,  was  a  “hybrid  individual  born  out  of  a  chemical  combina-  This  “half  Clark,  half  Costa”  was  unbearable  to  Antonioni,  who  considered  dubbing  to  be  a  mere  “acoustic   surrogate”  of  acting.  To  him,  dubbing  com-  Promised  the  intention  of  the  director,  leading  to  an  artificial  product  that  lacked  artistic  unity.  Director  Pier  Paolo  Pasolini,  who  called  both  dubbing  and  subtitles  “evils,”  said  that,  between  the  two,  dubbing  was  the  less  harmful,  since  it  allowed  you  to  see  the   picture  in  full.  Director   Jean  Renoir  called  dubbing  a  “monstrosity,  a  challenge  to  human  and  divine  laws.”  Director   Federico  Fellini  didn’t  agree   with  any  of them.  Dubbing   was  an   extension   of  his  shoots,  a  tech-  nique   he  would  use  to  retouch  and  rewrite.  He  met  lessly   dubbed   over   his   actors,   changing   dialogue   in  postproduction,   sometimes   having   worked   without   a  script.   (He   reportedly   instructed   his   actors   to   count  aloud   in   front   of   the   camera   so   that   he   could   insert   new  dialogue   afterward.)   Renato   Cortesi,   a   veteran   Fellini  dubber,   told   me   that,   during   the   filming   of   Amarcord  (1973),   he   witnessed   Fellini   ask   an   old   Neapolitan   lady  to   tell   him   a   sad   story.   Over   footage   of   this   woman  recounting   a   tragic   tale   about   her   grandson,   Fellini  added   a   new   sound   track   about   war   and   hunger  recorded   by   an   actor   from   Emilia-Romagna,   combining  the   vivid   expressiveness   of   the   South   with   his   favorite  northern   accent.  If   you   visit   a   dubbing   studio,   the   over-the-top   zest  of   the   actors   is   evident   in   everything   from   their   melo-  dramatic   speech   to   their   movements;   standing   in   front  of   the   microphone,   they   coil   and   twitch.   |   asked   Cortesi  whether   this   was   a   consequence   of   having   to   focus  one’s   lifelong   talent   into   the   few   centimeters   between  mouth   and   microphone,   a   kind   of   bodily   rebellion   to   the  condition   of   being   heard   but   not   seen,   and   he   laughed.  “Of   course   it   isn’t   easy   to   spend   a   life   in   the   darkness,  but   this   is   hardly   the   reason   why   they   twitch   and   turn!  Dubbers   are   used   to   reciting   while   trying   to   re-create  the  bodily   sensations  of  what  they   see  on  the  screen  before   them.  If  there  is  running  in  the  film,  they  will  run  on  their  feet.  The  moving,”   he  explained,  “is   the  result  of  re-creating   large  movements  in  small  spaces.”  There  are  still  few  options  for  those   seeking  to  watch  subtitled,  original-language   films  at  a  movie  house  in   Italy.  The  Metropolitan  cinema   on  Via   del  Corso  closed   recently   after  a   long  battle  involving  intel-  ACT-Cot  fay  2  show-business  people,  and   American  an  lectuals,  show  be  replaced  with  =  ‘4  ats  in  Rome,  to  be  rep!  th  a  clothin,  55   em   cie   remain   hooked   on   dubbing—perhapy because   of   simple   affection.   Familiar   voices   yield   emo.  tional  attachment.  sesco  Vairano,  a  dubber  and   dubbing  directo,  Enowe  for  adapting  foreign   films  considered  to   pe  60  “undubbable.”  such  as   the  French  bor  office  hit  Bien.  venue  chez  les  Ch'tis  (“Welcome  to  the  Sticks,”  2098)  which  relies  on  linguistic  misunderstandings  for  much  of  its  comedy,  explained  that  actors  become  just  as  attached  to  their  parts  as  audiences  do,  Vairano  has  65  been  one  of  the  few  directors  to  break  the  habit  of  matching  the  same  Italian  dubber  to  a   foreign  actor  for  all  his  films,  preferring   instead  to  select   the  dubber  according  to  the  requirements  of  the  role,  and,  he  admits,  he  was  hated  by  all  the  prima  donna  dubbers  for  70  this,  “If  you  take  that  actor  away  from  them,”  he  told  me,  “they  will   insult  you.”  In  2007,  |  met   dubber  Luca   Ward,  who  provided  the  voice  of  the  narrator  for  a  romantic  comedy  I  co-  wrote,   Scusa   ma   Ti   Chiamo   Amore   (“Sorry   but   T   Love  75   You”).   What   I   didn’t   then   know   was   that   everyone   Ward  met   wanted   him   to   recite   actor   Samuel   L.   Jackson's  Ezekiel  25:17  passage  from  the   film  Pulp  Fiction,  and  that   I   should   consider   it   an   honor   that   he   would   offer   a  performance   to   a   stranger.   When   she   finally   did   recite  80   the   monologue,   it   was   astonishing,   every   dramatic  pause   carefully   timed   and   every   word   perfectly   enunci-  ated.   I   understood   that,   if   anybody   took   Samuel   L.  Jackson   away   from   Ward,   it   would   have   meant   taking  away   a   part   of   his   soul;   he   was,   as   Antonioni   would   say,  85   half   Ward,   half   Jackson.   Leaving   the   day’s   recording  session,   Ward   told   me   he   was   off   to   have   dinner   with  actress   Meg   Ryan,   before   raising   an   eyebrow   and   clari-  fying,   “With   Meg   Ryan’s   dubber   ...   1   am   having  dinner   with   Meg   Ryan’s   voice.”  21.  The  last  sentence  of  the  passage  primarily  serves  to  illustrate  the  passage  author's  central  claim  that:  A.   a   dubber   wants   others   in   the   film   industry   to  respect  the  actor  he  or   she  usually   dubs.  B.  the  work  of   Ryan's   dubber  is  as  effective   as  that  of  Jackson's   dubber.  a   dubber   begins   to   seem   almost   like   a   hybrid   of  him-   or   herself   and   the   actor   he   or   she   dubs.   _  Ward  is  unlike  most   dubbers  in  that  he  prefers  (0  dub  many  different   actors.  22.  It  can   reasonably   be  inferred  from  the  passage  that  regarding  whether   dubbing  is  useful   or   valuable.  Vairano   would   most   strongly   sympathize   with   the  views   of:  F.  Antonioni.  G.  Fellini.  H.  Pasolini.  J.  Renoir.  GO   ON   TO   THE   NEXT   PAGE.

3   22  eee  3  23.  The   main  (lines  18-33)  is  for  the  Passage  aut  A.  B.  Cc.  D.  24.  to:  rR  G.  H.  J  FE  G.  H.  J.  function  of  the  second  paragraph  hor  to  present:  her  own  ideas  as  an  exam;  J  ple  of  a  contemporar:  perspective  on  the   merits  of  dubbing.  aad a  perspective  on  dubbing  that  bluntly  c  those  outlined  in  the  first  Paragraph.  de  ellini’s  personal,  direct  respons  it’s  criti-  aor,  ponse  to  Renoir’s  criti  a  claim,  centered  on  Fellini's  work,  that  strength-  ens  the  argument  she  makes  in  the  first  paragraph.  The  anecdote  about  Fellini’s  footage   of  a  woman  recounting  a  tragic  tale  (lines  25-33)  primarily   serves  explain  why  Fellini  preferred  to  feature  voices  with  northern  accents  in  his  films.  provide  a  famous   example  of  Fellini  closely  fol-  lowing  scripted  dialogue.  illustrate  the   extent  to  which   dubbing  was  a  part  of  Fellini's  craft.  show   why   Fellini   preferred   his   actors   to   follow   a  script   rather   than   tell   their   own   stories.  As   Cortesi   is   presented   in   the   passage,   does   he   agree  with   the   passage   author's   assum  for   dubbers’   “over-the-top   zest”  ions   about   the   reason  ine   34)?  Yes,  and  he  thinks  that  she  should  visit  his  dub-  bing   studio   to   see   how   he   works.  Yes,  and   he  suggests  that  the  reason  is  the  dubber’s  condition  of  being  heard  but   not   seen.  No,   and   he  gruffly  makes  clear  his   belief  that  she  does  not  at  all  understand  a  dubber’s  work.  No,   and   he  corrects  her  misinterpretation  with  an  explanation  of  his  own.  It  can  most  reasonably   be  inferred  from  the  passage  that  the  Metropolitan  cinema  on   Via  del  Corso  was  known  for  showing  films  that  had  been:  dubbed   only.  subtitled   only. both  dubbed   and  subtitled.  neither  dubbed  nor  subtitled.  35  27.  28.  29.  30.  The  passage  most  strongly  suggests  that  at  movie  houses  in   Italy  today,  compared  to   subtitled,  original-  language  films,  dubbed  films  can   be  found:  A.  B.  Cc.  D.  much   more   easily.  about   as   easily.  slightly  less  easily.  much  less  easily.  The  passage  indicates  that  a  foreign  film  with  which   of  the  following  characteristics  is  particularly  difficult  to  dub?  ‘ic  misunderstanding  that  creates  comedy  G.  action  that  advances  plot  H.  Reverse  chronology  that  provides  context  J.  Extensive  monologues  that  further  characterization  According  to  the  passage,  the  work  of  dubbing  director  Vairano  differs  from  that  of  most  other  Italian  directors  in  that  Vairano:  A.  focuses  on   dubbing   French  films  into  Italian.  B.   does   not   necessarily   match   the   same   Italian   dubber  to   the   same   foreign   actor   for   all   his   films.  works   mostly   with   “prima   donna”   dubbers.  does   not   believe   that   dialogue   should   be   rewritten  during   a   dubbing   session.  &.  D.  As   it   is   used   in   lines   16-17,   the   phrase   a   challenge   to  most   nearly   means:  F.   an   assault   on.  G.   a   declaration   of.  H.  a  question  for.  J.   an   offer   to.  GO   ON   TO   THE   NEXT   PAGE.

9  cE  Passage  IV  NATURAL   aster   This   passage   is   adapted   from   the   essay  "Making  Stuff:  From  Bacon  to  Bakelite”  i by   Philp   Ball),   e”   by   Philip   Ball   (©2010  During  the  Industrial  Revolution,  the  high  price  of  steel  meant  that  many  large  engineering  projects  were  carried   out   that   used   instead   cast   iron,   which   is   brittle  and  prone  to  failure.  This  was  why  Henry  Bessemer’s  5  new  process  for  making  steel  was  greeted  with  jubila-  tion:  the  details,  announced  at  a  meeting  of  the  British  Association  in  1856,  were  published  in  full  in  The  Times.  Bessemer  himself  was  lauded  not  just  as  an  engineer   but   as   a   scientist,   being   elected   a   Fellow   of   the  10   Royal   Society   in   1879,  Bessemer’s   process   controlled   the   amount   of  carbon   mixed   with   iron   to   make   steel.   That   the   propor-  tion   of   carbon   governs   the   hardness   was   first   noted   in  1774   by   the   Swedish   metallurgist   Torbern   Bergmann,  15   who   was   by   any   standards   a   scientist,   teaching   chem-  istry,   physics   and   mathematics   at   Uppsala.   Bergmann  made   an   extensive   study   of   the   propensity   of   different  chemical   elements   to   combine   with   one   another—a  property   known   as   elective   affinity,   central   to   the  20  eighteenth-century   notion   of  chemical  reactivity.  He  was  a  mentor   and  sponsor  of  Carl  Wilhelm  Scheele,  the  greatest  Swedish  chemist  of  the  age  and  co-discoverer  of  oxygen.  Oxygen,  as   a  component  of  air,  was  the  key  to  the  25  Bessemer  process.  It  offered  a  way  of  removing  impuri-  ties  from  pig  iron  and  adjusting  its  carbon  content  during   conversion  to  steel.  A  blast  of  air  through  the  molten  metal   turned  impurities  such  as  silicon   into  light  silica  slag  (a  collection  of  compounds  removed  from  30  metal  in  the  smelting  process),  and  removed  carbon  in  the  form  of  volatile  carbon  dioxide.  Pig  iron  contains  as  much  as  4  per  cent  carbon;  steels  have  only  around 0.3-2  per  cent.  Meanwhile,  the  heat  produced  in  these reactions  with  oxygen  kept  the  iron  molten  without  the  35  need  for   extra  fuel.  It  was  long  known  that   steel  can   be  improved  with  a  spice  of  other   elements.  A  dash  of  the  metal  man-  ganese  helps  to  remove   oxygen   and  sulphur  from  the  iron,  and   most  of  the  manganese  currently  produced  40   globally  is  used  for  this  purpose.  Manganese  also  makes  steel  stronger,  while  nickel  and  chromium  improve  its  hardness.  And  chromium  is  the  key  additive  in  stainless  steel—in  a  proportion   of  more  than   about  11  per  cent,  it  makes  the  metal  rust-resistant,  Most 45  modern  steels  are   therefore   alloys  blended  to  give   the  desired  properties.  But  is  this  science?  Some  of  the   early   innovations in   steel  alloys  were   chance  discoveries,   often  due  to  impurities   incorporated  by  accident.  In   this  respect,  50   metallurgy   has   long  retained   the   air  of   an  artisan  craft,  akin   to   the  trial-and-error  explorations   of   dyers,   glass-  makers   and  potters.  But  the  reason  for   this   empirici!  is   not   that   the   science   of   metallurgy   is   trivial;   it  is   because   it   is   so   difficult.   According   to   Rodney  ACT-COL   36  70  7 a  31.  32.  F  itish  physicist  whi  Cotterill,  a   remarkable  Bri  :  whose  ¢  tise  stretched  from  the  sciences  of  materials  19  pe  the  brain,  ‘metallurgy  is  one  of   our  most  ancien,  4°  but  is  often  referred  to  as  one  of  the  youngest  Sciences”  One  of  the  piace  difficulties  in  understang  the  behaviour  0!  materials  such  as  steel  is  tha  re  depends  on  its  structure  over  a  wide  range  of  length  scales,  from  the  packing   of  a  ee  some  the  and  shape  of  grains  micrometres   or  even  millimetre,  ne  Ley  rs  trouble  dealing   with   such  a  spay  sr  scales.  One  might  regard  this  difficulty  as  akin  to  that  in  the  social  sciences,  where  social  behaviour  is  goy.  erned  by  how  individuals  behave  but  also  how  we  inter.  act  on  the  scale  of  families  and  neighbourhoods,  within  entire  cities,  and  at  a  national  level.  (That's  why   the  social  sciences  are  arguably  among  the  hardest  of  sci.  ences  too.)  ing  The  mechanical  properties  of   metals   depend  on  how  flaws  in  the   crystal   structure,  called  defects,  move  and  interact.  These  defects  are  produced  by  almost  inevitable  imperfections  in  the   regular  stacking  of  atoms  in  the   crystallin  material.  The  most  common  type   of  stacking  fault  is  called  a  dislocation:  Metals  bend,  rather  than  shattering  like  porcelain,  because  dis-  locations  can  shift  around  and  accommodate  the   defor-  mation.  But  if  dislocations  accumulate  and  get  entangled,  restricting   their   ability  to  move,  the  metal  becomes  brittle.  This  is  what   happens  after   repeated  deformation,  causing  the  cracking  known  as   metal  fatigue.  Dislocations  can  also  get  trapped  at  the  bound-  aries  between  the  fine,  microscopic  grains  that  divide  a  metal  into  mosaics  of  crystallites.  The  arrest  of  disloca-  tions  at  grain  edges  means  that  metals  may  be  made  harder  by  reducing  the   size  of  their   grains,  a  useful  trick  for  modifying  their  mechanical  behaviour.  The  main  purpose  of  the  passage  is  to:  A.  explain  in  detail  the  various  experiments  Bessemer  conducted  in  order  to  develop  a  better  steel.  B.   provide  an  overview   of  some  of  the  scientific  prin-  ciniet  that  apply  to  the   creation  and  behavior  of  steel.  C.  describe  some  of  the  philosophical  questions  con-  cerning  metallurgy.  D.  illustrate  the  differences  between  pig  iron  and  cast  iron.  The  author  most  likely  includes  details  about  the  initial  response  to  Bessemer’s  new  steel-making  process  |"  order  to:  F._  emphasize  that  Bessemer’s  new  process  was  a  sig  nificant  achievement  for   industry.  G.   provide   support  for   the   author's   opinion  thst  Bessemer’s   new   process   was   prone   to   failure.  H.   describe   Bessemer’s   qualifications   as   an   engine’  J.   provide   specific   examples   of   the   criticism   th  Bessemer's   new   process   received.  GO   ON   TO   THE   NEXT   PAGE  fj

[  33,  It  can  reasonably   be  inferred  that   the  author  includes  the  information  that  Bergmann  was  a  mentor   and  spon-  sor  of  Scheele’s  mainly  to:  A.  introduce  the  fact  that  Bergmann  was  a  teacher  as  well  as   a  scientist.  (  suggest  that  Bergmann  was  a  more  successful  sci-  entist  than  Scheele  was.  give  an   example  of  the  cighteenth-century  notion  of  scientific  communities.  reinforce  Bergmann’s  credibility  as  a   scientist.  Cc.  D.  According  to  the  passage,  which  of  the  following   con-  versions  is  a   direct  result  of   adding  oxygen  to  molten  pig  iron?  F.  Light  silica  slag  is  converted  into  carbon  dioxide.  G.  Carbon  dioxide  is  converted  into  carbon.  H.  Silicon  is  converted  into  light  silica   slag. J.  Impurities  in  the  metal  are  converted  into  silicon.  35,   In   the   context   of   the   passage,   the   main   effect   of   the  word   “spice”   (line   37)   is   to   emphasize   that:  A.   elements   must   be   gradually   mixed   into   steel   in  order   to   produce   the   desired   effect.  adding   certain   elements   to   steel   can   enrich   the  steel’s   quality.  manganese,   chromium,   and   nickel   are   used   spar-  ingly   in   steel   because   of   their   expense.  D.  blending   elements  is  a   trial-and-error  process  that  has  not  yet  yielded  positive  results.  Based   on  the  passage,  with  which  of  the  following  statements  would  the  author  most  likely  agree?  F.  Metallurgy  is  not  an  art  because  it  requires   too  much  scientific  knowledge.  Metallurgy  is  too  difficult  to  be  considered  a  science.  Metallurgy  is  a  science  as  well  as  an  art.  Metallurgy  is  a  trivial  science.  G.  H.  J.  3  See  3  37.  The  passage  most  strongly  suggests  that  the  study  of  the  behavior  of  materials  and  the  study  of  the  social  sciences  are  similar  because  they:  A.  B.  G  require  analyses  that  span  a  wide  range  of  scales.  are  based   on  trial-and-error  experimentation.  involve  examination  of  the  size  and  shape   of  indi-  vidual  atoms.  produce  results   that  must  be  interpreted  by  both  scientists  and  artists.  D.  The  main  idea  of  the  last  paragraph  is  that:  F.  defects  in  the  crystal  structure  of  a  metal  deter-  mine  that  metal’s  mechanical  properties.  .  G.  dislocations  are  the  most  common  type   of  stacking  fault  in  a   metal.  H.  the   mechanical  behavior  of  a  metal  can   be  modi-  fied  by  increasing  the  size  of  a  metal’s  grains.  J.  microscopic  grains  divide  a  metal  into  mosaics  of  crystallites.  39.   As   it   is   used   in   line   56,   the   word   stretched   most   nearly  means:  A.   strained.  B.   exaggerated.  C.   extended.  D.   amplified.  40.   According   to   the   passage,   reducing   the   size   of   a  metal’s   grains   can   make   the   metal:  F.  more  rust-resistant.  G.   more   brittle.  H.   finer.  J.  harder.  END   OF   TEST   3  STOP!  DO   NOT   TURN   THE   PAGE  UNTIL  TOLD   TO  DO  SO.  37  DO   NOT   RETURN   TO   A   PREVIOUS   TEST.

ae |  A   CO:   O°   C2.OROrGHOGO"O %  SCIENCE   TEST  35   Minutes   —40   Questions  DIRECTIONS:  There  are  several  passages  in  this  test.  Each   passage   is   followed   by   several   questions.   After  reading   a   passage,   choose   the   best   answer   to   each  question   and   fill   in   the   corresponding   oval   on   your  answer   document.   You   may   refer   to   the   passages   as  often  as  necessary.  You   are   NOT   permitted   to   use   a   calculator   on   this   test.  Passage  |  The   termite   Reticulitermes   flavipes   consumes   wood and  bark.  A  study  examined  whether  the  consumption  of  wood   or   bark   mulch   by   R.   flavipes   varies   with   the   type   of  mulch   or   the   age   of   the   mulch.   Separate   portions   of   each  of   5   types   of   mulch   were   aged   (allowed   to   decay)   for   1,   24,  and   48   weeks.   Then,   2   g   of   each   type   of   1-week-old   mulch  were   put   into   a   box,   2   g   of   each   type   of   24-week-old   mulch  were   put   into   a   second   box,   and   2g   of   each   type   of  48-week-old   mulch   were   put   into   a   third   box.   Next,   1   g   of  R.   flavipes   was   added   to   each   box.   After   15   days,   the   mass  of   mulch   consumed,   in   milligrams   (mg),   was   determined  for   each   type   and   age   of   mulch   (see   figure).  ACT-Cot  Key  type   of   mulch  @  cedar  O  cypress  G  oak  oak  bark  &  pine  bark  mulch consumed (mg)  Figure   adapted   from   O.   P.   Pinzon,   R.   M.   Houseman,   and   C.   J.  Starbuck,   “Feeding,   Weight   Change,   Survival,   and   Aggregation   of  Reticulitermes   flavipes   (Kollar)   (Isoptera:   Rhinotermitidae)   in   Seven  Varieties   of   Differentially-Aged   Mulch.”   ©2006   by   the   Horticultural  Research  Institute.  GO   ON   TO   THE   NEXT   PAGE.

|   a  ho  oo  oo  oo  oO  Of  4,  Of  the  following  combinations  of  type  of  mulch  mulch  age,  which  combination  resulted  in  the  peat  mass  of  mulch  consumed  by  R.  flavipes  ?  type  of  mulch   mulch  age  A.  oak  24  weeks  B.  _  pine  bark  24  weeks  (oa  oak  48   weeks  D.  pine  bark  48  weeks  2.  Which  of  the  following  statements  about  the  effect  of  mulch  age  on  the  consumption  of  mulch  by  R.  flavipes  is   consistent   with   the   figure?   As   mulch   age   increased  from   |   week   through   48   weeks,   the   mass   of   mulch   con-  sumed   by   R.   flavipes:  F.  decreased  for  all  5  types  of   mulch.  G.   increased   for   all   5   types   of   mulch.  H.   initially   decreased   for   all   5   types   of   mulch,   but  then   increased   for   some   of   the   5   types   of   mulch.  J.   initially   increased   for   all   5   types   of   mulch,   but  then  decreased  for  some  of  the  5  types   of  mulch.  3.  Based  on  the  passage,  would  R.  flavipes  be  classified as  an  autotroph   or  as  a  detritivore,  and  why?  A.  Autotroph,   because  R.  flavipes  produces  its  own  energy   without  consuming  organic  material. B.  Autotroph,   because  R.  flavipes   obtains  its  energy  by   consuming  decaying  organic  material.  Detritivore,  because  R.  flavipes  produces  its  own  energy   without  consuming  organic  material.  D.   Detritivore,  because  R.  flavipes   obtains  its  energy  by  consuming  decaying  organic  material.  39  4.  Based  on  the  passage,  is  the  primary   food  source   of  R.  flavipes  more  likely  cellulose  or  cholesterol?  F.  Cellulose;  R.  flavipes  consumes  the  cell  mem-  branes   of  animal  cells,  and  the  cell  membranes  of  animal  cells  contain  cellulose.  G.  Cellulose:  R.  flavipes  consumes  the  cell  walls  of  plant  cells,  and  the  cell  walls  of  plant  cells  consist  primarily  of  cellulose.  H.  Cholesterol;  R.  flavipes  consumes  the  cell  mem-  branes  of   animal  cells,  and  the  cell  membranes  of  animal  cells  contain  cholesterol.  J.  Cholesterol;  R.  flavipes  consumes  the  cell  walls  of  plant  cells,  and  the  cell  walls  of  plant  cells  consist  primarily  of  cholesterol.  5.  Which  of  the  following   statements  comparing  the  con-  sumption   by  R.  flavipes  of  1-week-old  oak  mulch,  24-week-old  oak  mulch,  and   48-week-old   oak  mulch  is  supported  by  the   figure?  A.  More  |-week-old  mulch  was  consumed  than  24-week-old   mulch,  and  more  24-week-old  mulch  was  consumed  than  48-week-old  mulch.  B.  Less   |-week-old  mulch  was  consumed  than  24-week-old  mulch,  and  less  24-week-old  mulch  was  consumed  than  48-week-old  mulch.  C.  More  I-week-old  mulch   was  consumed  than  24-week-old   mulch,  and  less  24-week-old  mulch  was  consumed  than  48-week-old  mulch.  D.   Less   1-week-old   mulch   was   consumed   than  24-week-old   mulch,  and  more  24-week-old  mulch  was   consumed   than   48-week-old   mulch.  6.   What   mass,   in   grams   (NOT   milligrams),   of   the  48-week-old   oak   bark   mulch   was   consumed   by  R.  flavipes  ?  F   0.06  G.  014g  H.  0.6¢  J  14g  GO   ON   TO   THE   NEXT   PAGE.

BS  6904650700:  OO"  Passage   Il  Samples  of  Species  C  bacteria  must  often  be  trans-  ported  from  the   areas  in  which  they  are  collected.  During  transport,  the  samples  are  typically  packed  in  ice  to  keep  them  alive.  However,  ice  is  not  always  available  where  the  samples  are   collected.  Scientists  studied  how  lyophilization  (a  freeze-drying  process  that  doesn’t  require  ice)  followed  by  incubation  affects  the  survival  of   2  strains  (Strain  E  and  Strain  V2)  of  Species  C  bacteria,  Experiment  1  The  scientists  placed  a  100  tL  (1  pL  =  10°  mL) sample  of  a  nutrient  medium  containing  4  =  10°  Strain  E  elementary  bodies  into  each  of   8  sterile  test  tubes.  An  ele-  mentary  ly  is  the   infective  form  of  Species  C.  The  sample  in  each  of  the  tubes  was  then  lyophilized,  and  each tube  was  sealed.  Two  of  the  tubes  were  incubated  at  4°C,  2  were  incubated  at  20°C,  2  were  incubated  at  30°C,  and  2  were  incubated  at  37°C.  One   week   after   the   start   of   incubation,   the   percent  survival   (the   percent   of   the   elementary   bodies   that   sur-  vived)   was   determined   for   the   sample   in   |   of   the   2   tubes   at  each   temperature.   Then,   |   month   after   the   start   of   incuba-  tion,   the   it   survival   was   determined   for   the   sample   in  40  Table  |  Incubation  |  Percent  (%)  survival  at:  temperature  Strain  CC)  I  week  |  |  month  4  $2  SI  20  69  42  B  30  5   4  37  0  0  Experiment  2  ‘  7  ;  ientists  repeated  Experiment  I,  except  with  strain  V2  instead  of  Strain  E.  Phe  results  are  shown  jn  Table   2.  Table  2  Incubation  |  Percent  (%)  survival  at:  temperature  Strain  ec)  1  week  1  month  4   39  §  20   29  ms  30  2   2  37   0   0  Tables   adapted   from   Adrian   Eley   et   al.,   “Effect   of   Storage   Temper.  ature   on   Survival   of   Chlamydia   trachomatis   after   Lyophilization.”  ©2006   by   American   Society   for   Microbiology.  GO   ON   TO   THE   NEXT   PAGE:

£AOO  0  OO  0   0  0  Of  1   Which  of  the  followin,  10.  Statem  scri  i  ence  between  Expetiment  1  and  Expeieees  ?  a  A.  A  different  incubation  E  i  Experiment  1  than  in  Eipecmeuiee  eee  B.  A  different  strain  of  Species  C  was  tested  i  Experiment  I  than  in  Experiment  2.  j  e  C.  Samples  in  Experiment  |  were  lyophilized  before  being  transported,  whereas  samples  in  Experi-  ment  2  were  transported  on  ice,  D.  Samples  in  Experiment  1  were  incubated  for  1  week  before  being  transported,  whereas  samples.  in  Experiment  2  were  incubated  fo!  1  before  being  transported.  ee  .  Suppose  that  in  Experiment  2  the  scientists  had  deter-  mined  the  percent  survival  for   a  sample  incubated  at  25°C  for  1  week.  The  percent  suvivalor  the  Strain  V2  elementary  bodies  in  the  sample  would  most  likely  have   been:  F.   0%.  G.  between  2%  and  29%.  H.  between  29%  and  59%.  J.  greater  than  59%,  .   At   which   2   temperatures   was-the   percent   survival   of  Strain  V2  elementary  bodies  less  for  the  longer   incuba-  tion  time   than  for  the   shorter  incubation  time?  A.   4°C   and   20°C  B.  _4°C  and  37°C  C.   20°C   and   30°C  D.  20°C  and  37°C  Which   of   the   following   questions   was   NOT   addressed  by   the   experiments?  F.   Does   incubation   time   affect   the   percent   survival   of  Strain   E   and   Strain   V2   elementary   bodies   after  lyophilization? G.  Does  temperature  affect  the  percent  survival  of  Strain  E  and  Strain  V2  elementary  bodies  after  lyophilization?  H.   Does   the   number   of   Strain   E   or   Strain   V2   elemen-  tary  bodies  present  in  a  sample  before  lyophiliza-  tion   affect   their   percent   survival?  J.   Do   Strain   E   elementary   bodies   have   a   greater   per-  cent   survival   than   Strain   V2   elementary   bodies  after   lyophilization   and   incubation?  I.  12.  3;  One  week  after  the  start  of  incubation,  which  of  the  4  samples  of  Strain  V2  elementary  bodies  would  have  been  /east   likely  to  infect  another  organism  that  came  into   contact   with   the   samples?  A.  The  sample  that  had   been  incubated  at  4°C  B.  The  sample  that  had  been  incubated  at  10°C  C.  The  sample  that  had   been  incubated  at  20°C  D.  The  sample  that  had   been  incubated  at  37°C  Suppose  that  a   scientist  wants  to  transport  a   lyophi-  lized  sample  of  Strain  E  elementary  bodies.  Based   on  the  results  of  Experiment  1,  which  of  the  following  combinations  of  temperature  and  transportation  time  would  most  likely  ensure  the  greatest  percent  survival  of  the  elementary   bodies?  F.   4°C   and   |   week  G.   _4°C   and   |   month  H.  20°C  and  |  week  J.   20°C   and   |   month  Consider  the   rating  system  in  the  table  below  for  the  percent  survival  of  elementary   bodies  after  lyophilization.  Rating   Percent  survival  Excellent  |  >  90%  Good  2  30%  and  <  90%  Poor  <  30%  Based   on  this   table,  what  is  the  total  number  of   tubes  in  Experiment  |  that  contained  samples  having  a  poor  percent  survival?  A..   2  B. 4  Cc. 6  D.  8  _   eee   evr   DARE

Passage   Ill  When  an  object  is  submerged  in  a   fluid,  the  object  dis-  places  a  volume  of  fluid  equal  to  the  object's  submerged  volume.  The  fluid  exerts  an  upward  buoyant  force  on  the  object  that  is  equal  in  magnitude  to  the  weight  of  the  dis-  placed  fluid.  The  object  floats  if  the  buoyant  force  equals  the   object's  weight.  A  group  of  students  conducted  2  studies  on  buoyant  forces  using  3  fluids—water,  Fluid  A,  and  Fluid  B—  having  densities  of  1.0  g/cm’,  1.25  g/cm’,  and  1.50  g/cm’,  respectively.  Study   1  ___  The  students  placed  a   10  cm  long  cylinder  in  a  con-  tainer  of   water   and  measured  the  length  of  the  portion  of the  cylinder  that  was  submerged.  They  then  repeated  this  procedure  with  a  container  of  Fluid  A  and  a  container   of  Fluid  B  (see  Figure  1).  fs   ee   .   ca   b 2  water   Fluid   A   Fluid   B  Figure   |  Study   2  The   students   placed   a   stone—either   Stone   X,   Stone   Y,  or   Stone   Z—in   a   net   that   was   tied   to   a   spring   balance.   They  recorded   the   force   measured   by   the   balance   as   the   stone's  weight,   W.   They   then   submerged   the   stone   in   water   and  again   recorded   the   force   measured   by   the   balance   (see  Figure   2).  42  Figure  2  The   students   calculated   the   buoyant   force   on   the   stone   in  water  as  W  minus  the  force  that  was  measured  when  the  stone  was  submerged.  They  repeated  this  procedure  to  test  all   3   stones   in   all   3   fluids.   Table   I   lists   each   stone's  volume,  in  cm’,  and  W,  in  newtons  (N),  as  well  as  the  buoyant   force,   in   N,   on   each   stone   in   the   fluid.  Table   1  Buoyant   force   (N)   in:  Volume   |   W  Stone   |   (cm)   |   (N)   |   water   |   Fluid   A   |   Fluid   B  xX   48   1.50   |   0.47   0.59   0.70  ¥   96   1.50   |   0.94   1,18   1.41  Zz   96   3.00   |   0.94   18   141  GO   ON   TO   THE   NEXT   PAGE.

$0,066  00  560  08  14,  Based  on  the  results  of  Stud:  fluid   in   which   Stone   X   was  buoyant  force  on  Stone   X:  F.  decreased  only.  G.  increased  only,  H.   decreased  and  then  increased.  J.  varied  with  no  general  trend.  ly  2,  as  the  density  of  the  submerged  increased,  the  15.  Hated  on  the  ale  of  Study  2,  for  Stone  Y,  what  was  the  difference  between  the  bu  t  force  i  i  and  the  buoyant  force  in  Fluid  Bo  oe  A.  0.11.N  B.  0.23.  N  C.  0.47N  D.   0.71N  16,  Suppose  the  students  decide  to  study  whether  a   cylin-  der’s  volume  determines  the  submerged  length   of  the cylinder  in  a  given  fluid.  Which  of  the  following  pro-  cedural  changes  should  the  students  make  to  Study  |  ?  The  students  should  test:  F.  a  single  cylinder   with  multiple  fluids;  the  fluids  should  each   have  the  same  density  as   the   cylinder.  G.   a   single   cylinder   with   multiple   fluids;   the   fluids  should   have   different   densities.  multiple   cylinders   with   a   single   fluid;   the   cylinders  should   have   different   volumes   but   the   same  density.  multiple   cylinders   with   a   single   fluid;   the   cylinders  should  have  different  weights  but  the  same  volume.  H.  J.  17.   In   Study   1,   did   the   cylinder   displace   a   greater   volume  of  water   or   a  greater  volume  of  Fluid  A  ?  .  Water,  because  the   cylinder’s  submerged  length  was  greater  in  water  than  in  Fluid  A.  Water,  because  the   cylinder’s  submerged  length  was  greater  in  Fluid  A  than  in  water.  Fluid  A,   because  the  cylinder’s  submerged  length  was  greater  in  water  than  in  Fluid  A.  Fluid  A,   because  the   cylinder’s  submerged  length  was  greater  in  Fluid  A  than  in  water.  Saw p>  Acte0   43  18.  19,  20.  Suppose  that  in  Study  |  the  students  had  placed   the  cylinder  in  a  container  of  fluid  having  a   density  of  1.60  g/cm’.  The   submerged  length  of  the  cylinder  would  most  likely  have  been:  F.   less   than   4.9   cm.  G.  between  4.9  cm  and  5.9  H.  between  5.9  cm  and  7.4  J.  greater  than  7.4  cm.  cm.  cm.  Suppose  that  in  Study  2  the  students  had  tested  a  stone  having  the  same  weight  as  Stone  Z  but  a   larger  volume  than  Stone  Z.  Which  of  the  following   statements  about  the  buoyant  force  on  this  submerged  stone  would  be  correct?  The  buoyant  force  on  this  stone  in:  A.  water  would  have  been  less  than  0.94   N.  B.  Fluid  A  would  have   been  less  than  1.18  N.  C.  Fluid  B   would  have   been  greater  than  1.41  N.  D.  water  would  have  been  greater   than   the  buoyant  force  on  this  stone  in  Fluid  A.  Assume   that   Atlantic   Ocean   water   has   a   density   of  1.01   g/cm*   and   that   Pacific   Ocean   water   has   a   density  of   1.03   g/cm’.   Based   on   the   results   of   Study   I,   in  which   ocean   would   a   given   iceberg   more   likely   have  the   greater   submerged   volume?  F.   The   Atlantic   Ocean,   because   the   results   of   Study   |  indicate  that  submerged   volume  increases  as  fluid  density   decreases.  The  Atlantic  Ocean,   because  the  results  of  Study  1  indicate  that  submerged   volume  decreases  as  fluid  density   decreases.  The  Pacific  Ocean,   because  the   results  of  Study  1  indicate  that  submerged   volume  increases   as  fluid  density   decreases.  The  Pacific  Ocean,   because  the  results  of  Study  1  indicate   that   submerged   volume   decreases   as   fluid  density   decreases.  G.  GO   ON   TO   THE   NEXT   PAGE.

Acooo0o000c0  04  Passage  IV Chemical  reactions  that  release  beat  are  exothermic  reactions.  The   amount  of  heat  released  depends  on  the  number  of  moles  of  reactants  consumed  in  the   reaction.  A  mole  of   any  substance  is  6  *  10°  molecules  or  formula  units   of   the  substance.  _   When   sodium   hypochlorite   (NaCIO)   and   sodium  iodide  (Nal)  are  dissolved  in  acidic  H,O,  an  exothermic  action   occurs:  NaClO  +  Nal  —  products  +  heat  Students  did  an   experiment  to  study  this  reaction.  Experiment  In  each  of  8  trials,  the  students  performed  Steps   1-5:  1.  A  known  volume  of  a  0.2  mole/L  aqueous  NaClO  solu-  tion  was  poured  into   a  foam  coffee   cup.  A  lid  was  placed  on  the  cup.  2.  A  thermometer  was  placed  into   the  solution  through  a  hole  in  the  lid.  The  solution's  initial  temperature,  7),  of  22.0°C  was  recorded.  3.  The  lid  was  lifted,  and  a  known  volume  of  a  0.2  mole/L  aqueous   Nal  solution,  also  at  a  7,  of  22.0°C,  was  poured  into   the  cup.  The  lid  was  put  back  on  the   cup,  and  the  solution  was  swirled.  4.  The  solution’s  final  (maximum)  temperature,  T;,  was  measured.  5.  The  change  in  temperature,  AT,  was  calculated:  AT=T;-T  The  data  for  each  trial  are  shown  in  Table  1.  Table  |  Volume  of  |   Volume  of  NaClO  Nal  solution   solution  7,  AT  Trial  (mL)   (mL)  cy  |  CC)  1  9  100  22.0)  0.0  2  25   15  25.5)  3.5  3  50.  50  29.0|  7.0  4  70   30  BLT  |  9.7  5  be  25  32.5  |  10.5  6  80.  20  30.6  |  86  7  90  10  2)  4.2  8  100  0  22.0  |  0.0  ‘The  students  plotted  AT  versus  the  volume  of  NaClO  solution  for  each  trial  (see  Figure  1).  24  1  j  0  Uhl  Ma  MA  ed  Dd  il  a  al  0  10  20  30  40  50  60  70  80  90  10  yolume  of  NaCIO  solution  (mL)  Figure  |  Table  and  figure  adapted  from  M.  Jerome  Bigelow,  “Thermochem-  istry  of  Hypochlorite  Oxidations.”  ©1969  by  Division  of  Chemical  Education,  Inc,,  American   Chemical  Society,  Then  they  identified  the  trial  for  which  AT  had  its  greatest  value.  The  ratio  of  the  volume  of  the  NaCIO  solution  to   the  volume  of  the  Nal  solution   for  this  trial  is  the  mole  ratio  for  the  reaction.  GO   ON   TO   THE   NEXT   PAGE:

1.  If  a  trial  had   been  performe  solution  and  40  me  of  Nal  ? likely   have   been:  A.  less  than  25.5°C.  B.  between   25.5°C   and  29.9°¢,  C.  between  29.0°C   and  31-79  D.  greater  than   31.7°C,  :  with  60  mL  of  Ni  ‘olution,  ced  ate  T,  would  most  22.  Before  the  experiment,  a  student  pe  t  Trial  2  would  be  greater   than  A  erie  ae  results  shown  in  Table  1  Support  this  prediction?  i  Psion  for  Trial  2  was  5.1°C  less  than  AT  for  G.  ae  for  Trial  2  was  8.6°C  Jess  than  AT  for  n  5  Yes;   AT   for   Trial   2   was   5.1%  Trial  6,  ‘a8  5.1°C  greater  than  AT  for  Yes:  AT  for  Trial  2  was  8.6°  aie  wi  ‘C  greater  than  AT  for  .  In  each  trial  the  cup  was:  A.  25  mL.  B.  S50  mL.  Cc.  75m...  D.  100  mL,  I,  the  toral  volume  of  solution  poured  into  24.  Consider  the  trial  for  which  the  volume  of  NaClO  was  4   times  as   great  as  the  volume  of  Nal.  For  this  trial,  qT,  was:  RK  25.5°C.  G..  26.2°C.  H.  30.6°C.  4   325°C.  45  25.  27.  Suppose  a  trial  had  been   performed  with  20  mL  of  NaClO  solution  and  80  mL  of  Nal  solution,  Based   on  Figure  |,  AT  for  this  new  trial  would  most  likely  have  been  closest   to  which  of  the  following?  re  Ea  Ss  sc  re pomp  »  Which  of  the  following   statements  best  explains  why  AT  was  0.0°C  for  Trial  8?  The  volume  of  solution  added  was  0  mL  for  one  of  the:  F.  products,  NaClO,  so  no  reaction  had  occurred.  G.  products,  Nal,   so  no  reaction  had  occurred.  H.  reactants,  NaClO,  so  no  reaction  had  occurred.  feactants,  Nal,   so  no  reaction  had  occurred.  Suppose  that  the  reaction  studied  had   been  endother-  mic.  As  the  endothermic  reaction  progressed,  would  the  solution  temperature  more  likely  have   decreased   or  increased?  A,  Decreased,  because  the  released  heat,  B.  Decreased,  because  the  absorbed  heat.  C.  Increased,  because  the  D.  reaction  would  have  reaction  would  have  reaction  would  have  released  heat.  Increased,  because  the   reaction  absorbed  heat.  would  have  GO   ON   TO   THE   NEXT   PAGE.

Romooto  oO  0  Ca  Passage   V  When  rocks  are  melted  at  very  high   temperatures  beneath   Earth's   surface,   magma   (molten   rock)   is   formed.  The   gases   CO,   and   H,O   can   dissolve   in   magma.   Figure   |  shows,   for   4   different   magmas   (leucitite,   basanite,   rhyolite,  and   tholeiitic   basalt),   how   the   solubility   of   CO)   in   the  magna   at   1,150°C   varies   with   pressure   (in   megapascals,  a).  solubility of CO, in   tholeiitic  basalt  Lay   nn   a  0   50   100   150   200   250   300  pressure   (MPa)  parts  per  million  by   weight  Figure  |  Figure   2   shows,  at  3  different  pressures,  how  the   solu-  bility  of  CO,  in  rhyolite  magma  varies  with  temperature.  gma (ppmw)  solubility of CO, in   rhyolite ma;  850   950  1,050   1,150  temperature   (°C)  T  750  Figure  2  Figure  2   adapted   from   Robert  A.  Fogel  and   Malcolm  J.  Rutherford,  “The  Solubility  of  Carbon  Dioxide  in  Rhyolitic  Melts:  A  Quantitative  FTIR  Study.”  ©1990  by  the   Mineralogical  Society  of  America.  AGT-cov  Figure  3  shows,  at  4  different  pressures,  how  the  soly.  bility  of  CO,  in  rhyolite  magma  at  750°C  varies  With  the  weight  percent  of  H,O  in  the  magma.  2,500  300  MPa  400  MPa  2,0004  ee  solubility of CO, in   rhyolite magma (ppmw)  P|  0.0  1.0  2.0   3.0  4.0  5.0   6.0  7.0  80  weight  percent  of  H,0  in  rhyolite  magma  Figure   3  Figures  1  and  3  adapted  from  Jacob  B.  Lowenstern,   “Carbon  Diox-  ide  in  Magmas  and  Implications  for  Hydrothermal  Systems.”  ©2001  by  Springer-Verlag.  28.  According  to  Figure  2,   at  300  MPa,  the  solubility  of  CO,  in  rhyolite  magma  is  closest  to  2,000  ppmw  at  which  of  the  following  temperatures?  F.  700°C  G.   750°C  H.  800°C  J.  850°C  29.  Based   on  Figure  3,  at  750°C  and   350   MPa,  rhyolite  magma   having   a   solubility   of   CO,   equal   to   1,250   ppmw  would   most   likely   have   a   weight   percent   of   H,O   that   is:  A.  less  than  2.0%.  B.  between  2.0%  and   4.0%,  C.   between   4.0%   and   6.0%. D,  greater  than  6.0%.  46  GO   ON   TO   THE   NEXT   PAGE.

0.  iu.  According  to  Figure  1,  at  1,150°C,  the  solubili  CO,  in  basanite  magma  and  the  solubility  of  a.  Ng  tholeiitic  basalt  magma  are  closest  in  value  at  which  of  the   following   pairs   of   pressures?  basanite  magma  _tholeiitic  basalt  magma  50   MPa 3  G.  50  MPa  380  MPa  H.  125MPa  200  MPa  J.  125  MPa  250  MPa  Based  on  Figure  1,  at  1,150°C  and  150  MPa,  the  solu-  bility  of  CO,  in  leucitite  ma;  i  i  gma  is  approximately  how  much  greater  ili  go  roe  se  or  less  than  the  solubility  of  CO,  in  A.  1,750  ppmw  greater  B.  2,300  ppmw  greater  C.   1,750   ppmw   less  D.  2,300  ppmw  less  47  Aco0o0o0000  of  32.  According  to  Figure  2,  increasing  the  temperature  from  650°C  to  1,150°C  has  the  lesser  effect  on  the  solubility  of  CO,  in  rhyolite  magma  at  which  pressure,  100  MPa  or  300  MPa  ?  F100  MPa;  the  solubility  of  CO,  decreases  by  about  400   ppmw.  100  Mpa:  the  solubility  of  CO,  decreases  by   about  1,300  ppmw.  300  MPa;  the   solubility  of  CO,  decreases  by  about  400  ppmw.  300  MPa;  the  solubility  of  CO,  decreases  by  about  1,300  ppmw.  G.  H.  PA  .  Consider  the   solubility  of  CO,  in  rhyolite  magma  at  750°C  and  200  MPa,  as  shown  in  Figure  2.  According  to  Figure  3,  this  rhyolite  magma  has  a  weight  percent of  H,0  closest   to  which  of  the  following?  0.0%  2.0%  4.0%  6.0% SOsP>  GO   ON   TO   THE   NEXT   PAGE.

ooo0  on   00  08  Passage  VI  When  viewed   from  Earth,  the  other  planets  in  the  solar  system  usually  appear  to  move  prograde  (eastward  relative  to  the  stars).  Occasionally,  however,   each  planet  appears  to  briefly  move  retrograde  (westward  relative  to  the  stars).  For   example,  Figure  |  shows  Mars’s  position  rel-  ative   to   the   stars   on   9   dat  February  26,  2006.  lates  between  July  24,  2005,  and  Key  *   star ©  Mars  7/24/2005  *   *  us  os  a  =  10/01/2005  —>~---9-~--  atte  ®  st  Rw:  <<  west  cast  —>  Figure   |  Two   hypotheses   were   proposed   to   explain   why   the  planets  occasionally  appear  to  move  retrograde.  Hypothesis  1  Earth  is  the  solar  system’s  central  body,  and  the  other  bodies  move  around  Earth  in  looped  orbits.  Each   body  (except   Earth)  has   2  circles  associated   with  it:  a  deferent  and   an  epicycle.  Both  circles   rotate  counterclockwise,  and  their  combined  motions  result  in  a  body  following  a  looped  orbit.  In  Figure  2,  the  left  panel  shows  Mars’s  deferent  and  epicycle,  and  the  right  panel  shows  Mars’s  orbit.  Marg  a  ff)  i  Mars  \  lepicycle  \O  !  \   Barth  /  \.  y  defereit  a  Figure   2  ACT-001,  48  As  a  body  passes  through  @  loop,  the  body's  motion  changes  from  prograde  to  retrograde  and  back.  The  larger  a  body's  deferent,  the  more  loops  in  the  body's  orbit,  and  the  more  often  that  body  passes  through  a  loop.  Hypothesis  2  The  Sun  is  the   solar  system's  central  body,  and  the  planets  move  counterclockwise  around  the  Sun  in  elliptical  orbits.  The  larger  a  planet's  orbit.  the  more  time  the   planet  takes  to  complete  a  revolution  around  the  Sun.  As  a  result,  the  line  of  sight  from  Earth  to  a  a  planet  drifts  over  time.  Figure  3  shows  the  orbits  of  arth  and  Mars,  and  the  positions  of  Earth  and  Mars,  on  each  of  the  4  dates  labeled  in  Figure  1,  For  each  date,  the  line  of  sight  from  Earth  to  Mars  is  projected  onto  a  view  of  the  sky.  There  are  2  rules   for  apparent  retrograde   motion:  ©  A  planet  with  an  orbit  larger  than  Earth's  appears  to  move  retrograde  whenever  Earth   passes  between  the  Sun  and  that  planet,  The  larger  that  planet's  orbit,  the  more  often   a   pass   occurs.  ©  A  planet  with  an  orbit  smaller   than  Earth's  appears  to  move  retrograde  whenever  that  planet  passes  between  the  Sun  and  Earth.  The  smaller  that  planet's  orbit,  the  more  often   a  pass  occurs.  Figure  3  GO   ON   TO   THE   NEXT   PAGE.

4O-0'0.0.00.0"e-@4  Mu  a  &  Bi)  which  of  the  following  statements  best  describes  i  mary  difference  between  the  two  hypotheses?  Hypoth,  esis  |  claims  that  all  planets  follow: F.  looped  orbits  around  Earth,  whereas  Hypothesi  claims  that  all  planets  f  piel  oui  athe  ete  Pp!  ts  follow  elliptical  orbits  .  looped  orbits  around  Barth,  where:  claims  that  all  planets  follow  around  Earth,  .  elliptical  orbits  around  the  Sun,  whereas  H  sis  2  claims  that  all  planets  follow  around  the  Sun.  Lb  “era  tooped  elliptical  orbits  around  th  sis  2  claims  that  all  pla  around  Earth,  ‘as  Hypothesis  2  elliptical  orbits  pothe-  orbits  ‘¢  Sun,  whereas   Hypothe-  nets  follow  looped  orbits  Assume  that  Figures  2  and  3  are  drawn  to   scale.  Which  of  the   figures,  if  either,  implies  that  the  distance between  Earth  and  Mars  varies  with  time?  A.  Figure  2  only  B.   Figure   3   only  C.  Both  Figure   2  and  Figure  3  D.  Neither  Figure  2  nor  Figure  3  Consider   both  the  interval  of   time  represented  in  Fig-  ures  |  and  3  and  the  reason  that,  according  to  Hypothe-  sis   2,   the   line   of   sight   from   Earth   to   Mars   drifts   over  time.   Is   the   top   portion   of   Figure   3   consistent   with   that  reason?  F.   Yes;   Earth   is   shown   as   having   the   smaller   orbit   and  as  having  completed  a  greater  percentage   of  its  revolution  around  the  Sun  than  is  Mars.  Yes;  Earth  is  shown  as  having  the  larger  orbit  and  as  having  completed  a  greater  percentage   of  its  revolution  around  the  Sun  than  is  Mai  ;  No;  Earth  is  shown  as  having  the  smaller  orbit  and  as  having  completed  a  greater  percentage   of  its  revolution  around  the  Sun  than  is  Mars,  4  No;  Earth  is  shown  as  having  the  larger  orbit  and  as  having   completed  a  greater  percentage  of  its  revolution  around  the  Sun  than  is  Mars.  G.  Bas  ioure  1,  as  viewed  from  Earth,  for  approxi-  mae  nee  any  ‘days  between  July  2005  and  Febru-  ary  2006  did  Mars  move  retrograde?  A.  30  B.  70  C150  D.  220  38.  39.  40.  A  supporter   of  Hypothesis  |  and  a  supporter  of  Hypothesis  2  would  both  be  likely  to  agree   with  which  of  the  following   statements?  When  viewed   from  Barth,  if  a   planet  appears  to  be  moving  prograde,  that  planet  is  actually  moving:  F.  G.  clockwise  around  Earth.  clockwise   around  the   central  body  in  the  solar  system,  counterclockwise  around  the  Sun.  i  counterclockwise  around  the  central  body  in  the  solar  system.  HH.  J  Can  Hypothesis  2  explain  why  Venus  occasionally  appears   to   move   retrograde?  s;  Hypothesis  2  accounts  for  the  motion  of  planets   that   are   closer   to   the   Sun   than   Earth   is.  G.   Yes;   Hypothesis 2   accounts   for   the   motion   of  planets   that   are   farther   from   the   Sun   than   Earth   is.  H.   No;   Hypothesis   2   does   not   account   for   the   motion  f   e   closer   to   the   Sun   than   Earth   is.  No;   Hypothesis   2   does   not   account   for   the   motion  of   planets   that   are   farther   from   the   Sun   than   Earth  Is.  END   OF   TEST  4  STOP!  DO   NOT   RETURN   TO   ANY   OTHER  TEST.  49

Scoring  Keys  for  Form  C01  Use  the  scoring  key  for  each  test  to  score  your  answer  document  for  the  multiple-choice  tests.  Mark   a  “1”  in  the  blank   for   each   question   you   answered   correctly.   Add   up   the   numbers   in   each   reporting   category   and   enter   the   total  number  correct  for  each  reporting  category  in  the  blanks  provided.  Also  enter  the  total  number  correct  for  each  test  in  the  blanks  provided.  The  total  number  correct  for  each  test  is  the  sum  of  the  number  correct  in  each  reporting  category.  Test   1:   English—Scoring   Key  Total   Number   Correct   for   English   Test   ___—  a   (POW   +   KLA   +   CSE)   (75)  ~ a  feporti  *Reporting  Cat  ries  Geer  penta   pow  =  Pradaction  of  Writing  ry.  KLA  =  Knowledge  of  Language  Key  |POW|  KLA|  CSE  Key  |POW|  KLA|  CSE   CSE  =  Conventions  of  Standard  English  1  ¢  —  39.  C  __  2H  =  40.  F  =  3  8B  =  At  |i  4H  =  42.  F  me  5.  C  =  43.  B  -_  6  F}__  44.  F  |  __  r/o  Ne|  De  45s  6  8G  _  46.  F  Eah  oA  |  47,  A  a  10.  H  at  4p,  BAS  1.  D  =  49.  B  fal.  12.  G  —_  50.  G  —  13.  B  at  51.  0  Pal  14,  J  =  52.  J  ee  15;  °A:  |  53.  A  oe  16.  J  _-  54.  G  |__  1%  So  =3  55.  D  as  18.  F  |__  56,  ft  19.  A  Ce   S76  |  20.  F  |__  a  21.  B  Nae  59.  B  Le  22.  J  hs  0-H)  fi  23.  B  pall  61.  D  ee  24.  H  =  62.  F  Ems,  OBA  fo  eo  |=  26.  J  Ee  64.  H  —  65.  D  ae  4  i  ao   RY  de  68.  G  3)  Number  Correct   (Raw  Score)  for:  ee  wm  ole  oe  Production  of  Writing  (POW)  69;  2G.  Las  68.  J  oe   3)  31.  D  heidi   69.  D  —  32.  G  es  70,  J  ees  Knowledge  of   Language   (KLA)  33.  B   ave  71,  B  bs  (12)  ce   igh   ae   72.   H   a   Conventions of   Standard   English   (CSE)  35.  OD  73.  A  ea  96.  Gis)  on  74.  =a  o7.c  8  38.   F

i  Test  2:  Mathematics—Scoring  Key  —  Reporting   Category*  PHM  z 2  IES  MDL  a  AMIMNODNSTHMOeSVOODOIMITOcCOLTHOnySec orm  Reporting   Category*  PHM  1ES  |MDL  za ® <   z   >   n   (7)   o  FS   roy  AMOFcoOmemMeVUMDFSTOOONDIDAMAXAOCOAD  Combine  the  totals  of  these  columns   and  put  in  the  blank  for  PHM  in  the  box  below.  ‘Reporting  Categories  PHM  =  Preparing  for  Higher  Math  N   =  Number  &  Quantity  A   =  Algebra  F   =  Functions  G  =  Geometry  S   =  Statistics  &  Probability  —  1ES  =  Integrating  Essential  Skills  MDL  =  Modeling  Number  Correct  (Raw  Score)  for:  Preparing  for  Higher  Math   (PHM)  (N+A+F+G4S8)   (35)  Integrating  Essential  Skills  (IES)  at  a  (25)  Total   Number   Correct   for   Mathematics   Test   Sees  (PHM   +   IES)   (60)  Modeling   (MDL)  (Not   included  in  total  number  correct  for   (24)  mathematics   test   raw   score)

Test   3:   Reading—Scoring   Key  [  Reporting  “Reporting   Categories  Category*  Ps  KID  =   Key  Ideas  &  Details  CS  =  Craft  &  Structure  Key  |  KID  |  CS  |  IKI  Key  |  KID  |  CS  |  IKI   IKI   =  Integration  of  Knowledge  &   Ideas  a   21.   C   ae  SA   ee   22.   G   a  Roan   poe   23.   B   od  G1  oe  24.  H  =  5.  B  ae  25:  Di)  6H  ze  2.  G|__  Tan   ai   ee   |   Sy   Vo  8  F  a  28.  F  9D  7  2.  B]__  10.   F   te   30.   F   rae   Number   Correct   (Raw   Score)   for:  14,   Be}   31.   B   =  1  a  32.  F  _  Key  Ideas  &  Details   (KID)  Ee  ae  -h|  e  33.  D  (23)  cy  a   a  SO  Se  16,00  |  35.  B  -  Craft  &  Structure  (CS)  75)  16:   Hiss   3.   H   |  47.  2D:  on!  a7:  A  Integration  of  Knowledge  &  Ideas  (IK!)  oe  ae  ae  @  18;  Hts:  39.  C  aa  Total  Number  Correct   for  Reading   Test  va  |  Pe  a,  J  |  (KID  +   CS  +  IKI)  (40)  Test  4:  Science—Scoring  Key  *Reporting  Categories  Reporting   Reporting   1OD  =  Interpretation   of  Data  Category*   Category"  SIN  =  Scientific  Investigation  Key  |  10D  |  SIN  |  EMI   Key  |  10D  |  SIN   |  EMI  EMI  =  Evaluation  of  Models,  Inferences  &   Experimental   Results  a  a  ae  21.  ¢  eb  2.  2  ie  eee  =  ab  qs  23.  D  —=  4.   G6  |__  24:  Be  5.  D  pa  *  25.  B  ee  6  6  |__  26.  J  “F;  7.  8  boss  27.  B  aS  8.  G  aa  a  el  Beak  ale  oar  CA  10.  H  —  0.  J}  41.  D   pee  at  ae  Number  Correct   (Raw   Score)  for:  12.  H  32,  F   |__  . =—   f   Data  2   Poe   5  |  Interpretation  of  Data  (IOD)  =e  14.  G  34.  F  at  £  ad  -  =  Scientific  Investigation  (SIN)  pas  een,  ot  ei  =p  (a  35.  C   ses  oo  (10)  16.  H  on  36.  F  —  Evaluation  of  Models,  inferences  &  7A  aly  37.  B  —  Experimental   Results   (EMI)  18.  F  Le  38.  J  ee  (14)  19.  C  aS  39.  B   any  Total  Number  Correct  for  Science  Test  ___  20.  F  —s  40.  F   eas  (10D   +  SIN  +   EMI)  (40)  i

Explanation  of  Procedures  Used  to  Obtain  Scale  Scores   from  Raw  Scores  each  of  the  four  tests  on  Ore  ato  humber  of  corect  reer   tere  mite  ay  .  Use   the  table  below   to  convert   your  raw  scores  to  scale  s.  For  each  test,  locate  and  circle  your  raw  score  or  the  range  of  raw  scores  that  includes   it  in  the  table  below.  Then,  ead  across  to  either  outside  column  of  the   table   and  circle  the  scale  score  that  corresponds  to  that  raw  score.  As  you  determine   your  Scale  scores,  enter  them  in  the  blanks  provided  Oe  aoa  eeas  Possible  scale   score  for  each  testis  patron  SL  Score  for  any   test  on  which  you  scale  scores.  To  do  this,  add  your   four  scale  scores  and  divide  the  sum  by  4.  If  the  resulting  number  ends  in  a  fraction,  round  it  off  to  the  nearest  whole  number.  (Round  down  any  fraction  less  than  one-half;  round  up  any  fraction  that  is  one-half  or  more.)  Enter  this  number  in  the   blank.   This  is  your  Composite  score.  The  highest  possible   Composite  score  is  36.  The  lowest  possible  Composite  score  is  1.  ACT  Test  C01   Your   Scale   Score  English  Mathematics  Reading  Science  Sum   of   scores  Composite  score  (sum  +  4)  NOTE:  If  you  left  a  test  completely  blank  and  marked  no  items,  do  not  list  a  scale   score  for   that  test.  If  any   test  was  completely  blank,  do  not  calculate  a  Composite  score.  —  Raw   Scores  |  Scale  Test  1  Test   2   Test  3  Ursaial  Soe  Score  English  Mathematics  Reading  Sei  |  36  73-75  58-60   39-40  39-40   36  35  70-72  56-57  38  =  Po  34   69  54-55  37  =  Ba  |  4  4  2.63  36  37   33  |  32  67  51  s   =   z  31  66  50  ae   35  30  pu  65  48-49  34  ke  Fs |  2  64  46-47  33   ee  2 x  62.63  44-45  32  s   a  |  be  61  41-43  31  =   =  |  26  59-60  38-40  a  aes  4  25  57-58  36-37  29  a  4  54-56  34-35  28  27-28   24  23  51-53   32-33   26-27  25-26  23  22  49-50   30-31   25  23-24  22  2  29  24  21-22  21  20  43-45  28   22-23  19-20  20  <  41-42  26-27  i  i  18  ie   40  24-25  20  16-17  18  a  38-39  21-23   18-19   14-15  v7  |  1  35.37  ed  Mu   te  ‘3 15   31-34   14-17   15-16   12   8 3050  14-13   14   10-11  as  |  14  tes  27-28  #10  bai  3  2  bes  24-26  7  a  ;  it  7  21-23  S  ei  H  10  :  21-28   :  A   6  10  10   4  7   i   :  16-17  9  are  3  6   *  : 8  o  Ms  3  H  7  11-12   2   4   3   6  4  9-10  =  3   2   :  ;  78  1  =   ~  s  ;  5-6  me  2  1  :  :   4  “a  1  rs  :  2  23  0  (e}  o  &  Fe   ~

