Chapter 35: Miscellaneous Topics
As we said at the very start of this book, the ACT tests a TON of math topics from algebra, geometry,
precalculus, and more. In this chapter, we will cover all the miscellaneous topics that we have not covered
yet in this book. All topics in this chapter have appeared on the ACT before and will appear on the
ACT again in the future. However, none of these miscellaneous topics are commonly tested, so you should

only focus on this chapter after you have mastered the other much more commonly tested chapters in the rest
of the book. The topics in this chapter progress from the easier and more commonly tested topics to the more
difficult and less commonly tested topics.

Venn Diagrams
A Venn diagram is a diagram of overlapping circles that helps visualize the logical relationship between sets

and their elements. You have likely seen a Venn diagram before, but if this concept is new to you, let’s use the
example below to see how it works.
Example 1: Among a group of 23 students, 14 play tennis, 10 play soccer, and 4 play both. Of the 23

students, how many play neither tennis nor soccer?
A. 3

B. 4

C. 5

D.
7

Solution: To start, we can draw a Venn diagram and start labeling some numbers.

Soccer

Tennis

I

Both tennis

Neither tennis

and soccer

nor soccer

The left circle represents students who play tennis, so we need a total of 14 students inside that circle. The
right circle represents students who play soccer, so we need a total of 10 students inside that circle. The
overlapping region in the middle represents the students who play both soccer and tennis. We are told that

total is 4, so we can label the overlapping region with a 4. The area inside the rectangle and outside of the
circles represents the students who play neither tennis nor soccer.
We can fill in the other spots in the Venn diagram with the information from the question.
We are told that there are 14 students total who play tennis and 4 students play both tennis and soccer, so we
can subtract to find the number of students who play only tennis.
Students who play only tennis = 14 — 4 = 10
We can put a 10 in the left circle, which shows that 10 students play only tennis.

- 302

Chapter 35: Miscellaneous Topics

We can repeat this process with the 10 total soccer players, again subtracting the 4 students who play both
tennis and soccer to find the students who play only soccer.
Students who play only soccer = 10 -4 =6
We can put a 6 in the right circle, which shows that 6 students play only soccer.
We can see the updated Venn diagram below.

Soccer

Tennis

|

3

Both tennis

Neither tennis

and soccer

nor soccer

So far, we have a total of 20 students (10 play only tennis, 4 play both, and 6 play only soccer). The question
tells that there are 23 students, so we can find the number of students who neither tennis nor soccer.
Students who play neither tennis nor soccer = 23 — 20 = 3
The answer is A. Anytime you see a Venn diagram question on the ACT, you should always draw the
diagram as we did in this question.

Made-Up Math
The ACT sometimes includes terms or equation that are entirely made-up. While these questions often
confuse students on test day because the question includes a term or equation they have never used before, they
are most commonly no different than normal functions questions. Let’s take a look at an example.

Example 2: If a®b = 3a? — 4b, what is the value of 5@9 ?
A. 39

B. 48

C. 66

D.

189

The ® is not an actual math term. However, in the question, the a®b = 3a? — 4b is defined as a function.
To solve, 5@9 we plug in 5 for a, 9 for b, and solve.

5 @9 = 3(5)? —4(9)
5@9=75 —36

39
=9
5@
The answer is A. If you ever see a math term on the ACT that you have never seen before, do not freak out!
It is probably just made-up math. Stay calm, read the question carefully, and solve.

- 303
-

math

Logic
Logic questions ask you to think about a given statement and determine which answer choice must also be
true.

Example 3: Given the true statement, “if it is Monday, there is bad traffic,” which of the following
statements must be true?
A.

Ifitis not Monday, there is bad traffic.

B.

Ifitis not Monday, there is not bad traffic.

C.

Ifthere is bad traffic, it is Monday.

D.

Ifthere is not bad traffic, it is not Monday.

These questions often seem confusing until you learn one quick tip: always look for the contrapositive
statement. The contrapositive of a statement must always be true.
Original Statement: If A, then B
Contrapositive Statement: If not B, then not A.

The contrapositive is created by switching the order of the original statement and negating both. Let’s apply
this to Example 3:
Original Statement: If it is Monday, there is bad traffic.

Contrapositive Statement: If there is not be bad traffic, it is not Monday.

The answer is D. This trick always works for any logic question where the original statement is presented in
the “if A, then B” pattern and asks which statement must be true.

There can be other logic questions as well on the ACT where this trick does not work. If you see a logic
question that is presented in another way, do your best to think through the question carefully. If you are
unsure of what the answer is, bubble in your best guess and move on. Do not waste too much time on these
types of questions.

Pattern Spotting
Pattern spotting questions present students with a question that seems very overwhelming to solve until you
spot the pattern. Once you spot the pattern, solving is easy. The challenge is spotting the pattern. Let’s take a
look at the example below to see how this works.
Example 4: The first three elements of a pattern are shown below. Each element is composed of small

squares with side lengths of 14 inches. Each element is a square with both dimensions 14 inches less than
the dimensions of the next element. What is the perimeter, in inches, of the 5th element?
A.

70

B.

126

D.

280

Solution: Following the pattern, the 4th element has a length and width of 4 squares, and the 5th element has
a length and width of 5 squares. The length of each side of the squares is 14 inches, so the side total side
length for each side of the 5th element is 14 x 5 = 70 inches.
The perimeter of the 5th element is all 4 sides added up. Since the shape here is a square, we can use the
equation perimeter = 4s, where s is the length of one side of the square.

Perimeter = 4(70) = 280
The answer is D.

- 304-

Chapter 35: Miscellaneous Topics

Mapping
Mapping questions ask students to map movements and make a conclusion about the final position of an
object. For these questions, we always recommend that you draw your own map of the movements.
Example 5: Jimmy normally drives 15 miles on the highway due east to get home from the gym, but the

highway is closed due to construction. To take a detour around the construction, Jimmy now needs to
leave the gym and drive 2 miles north, turn right and drive 8 miles east, turn right and drive 5 miles south,
turn right and drive 2 miles west, turn right and drive 3 miles north, and finally turn right and drive the rest

of the way home on the highway. Compared to when there is no construction, how many additional miles
does Jimmy now have to drive to get home?
A.

12

B.

14

C.

18

D. 29

To solve, we need to sketch out Jimmy’s route home. Normally, Jimmy’s normal route on the highway is
shown by the thicker line in the middle. The thinner lines show the route

Jimmy needs to take to get around

the construction and back on the highway.

Home

Once we draw our own version of the map, solving this question is much easier. We need to find total number
of miles that Jimmy drives when there is construction. To do this, we need to find out where Jimmy gets back
on the highway.

We know the entire highway has a length of 15 miles. During his detour, Jimmy travels 8 miles east and then
2 miles west, so when he gets back on the highway, he has moveda total of 6 miles east. When he 1s getting
on the highway at the end of the detour, he is 6 miles away from the gym. Therefore, he still has 9 miles left to
drive on the highway to get home. Adding up all of the driving during the detour and the 9 miles on the
highway, we can find the total distance Jimmy drives to get home.
Jimmy’s Drive Home = 2+84+54+34+2+9=29
Jimmy drives a total of 29 miles to get home.
Normally, Jimmy drive 15 miles on the highway to get home. To find how many additional miles he drives,

we subtract. 29 — 15 = 14. The answer is B.

- 305
-

math

Puzzles
The ACT also includes a variety of puzzle questions. Puzzle questions require more problem-solving skills
and less traditional math skills. These questions are often some of the most difficult to prepare for on test day
and most commonly appear in the last 15 questions of the test. Puzzle questions can often be very
time-consuming to solve, so we advise that you skip any puzzle questions you do not know how to solve
immediately and save them for last.

Example 6: Office Supply Depot sells binders in two ways: a set of 10 binders in a large box and 1 binder
inasmall box. The large box and small box have the same width and length but different heights. The
large box has a height of 12 inches, and the small box has a height of 2.5 inches. Matt has a spot in the

comer of his office to store binders. He is going to stack the boxes of binders to a height of 5.5 feet. What
is the maximum number binders that he can store?
A. 66

B. 62

C. 60

D. 52

Solution: First, we need to convert the height of 5.5 feet to inches.
12 inches
5.5 feet x ————— = 66 inches
1 foot

Now, we need to figure out the best way to maximize the binders that Matt can store. The large boxes are the
more efficient way to store the binders, so we first want to stack as many large boxes as possible. Each large
box has a height of 12 inches, so we can stack 5 large boxes. The 5 large boxes have a total height of
5 large boxes X 12 inches per box = 60 inches
The 5 large boxes are 60 inches tall, so now we only have 6 inches left. We cannot add any more large boxes

because another large box would make the total height over 66 inches.
Next, we have to find out how many small boxes we can add. We have 6 inches of space left and each small
box is 2.5 inches, so we can add 2 small boxes.
2 small boxes xX 2.5 inches per box = 5 inches

We cannot add a third small box because adding another small box would make the total height be over 66
inches.

With 5 large boxes and 2 small boxes, the total height is

5 large boxes(12 inches per box) + 2 small boxes (2.5 inches per box) = 65 inches
So, how many binders do we have? Each large box holds 10 binders, and each small box holds 1 binder, so

Total binders = 5(10) + 2(1) = 52
The answer is D. As you can see with this example, puzzle questions do not rely on traditional math skills
and can be time-consuming. You will have more practice with puzzle questions in the practice questions.

- 306
-

Chapter 35: Miscellaneous Topics

Binomial Theorem and Pascal’s Triangle
To expand binomials with powers higher than 2, such as (2x + 3)*, we need to know how to use the binomial
theorem and Pascal’s triangle. If you have never done this before, this will be a bit tricky at first. However,
you do need to know how to do this for some advanced questions that appear in the middle and end of the
ACT.

Pascal’s triangle (Shown below) gives us the coefficients for an expanded binomial in the form of

(a+ b)", where n is the row of the triangle. To draw Pascal’s triangle, we start with a 1 at the top. The
outsides of the triangle are always 1, but the inside numbers are the sum of the two numbers above it. Each
row is built from the row above it. The first 5 rows of Pascal’s triangle are shown below.

Row

Exponent

Pascal’s Triangle

0

(a+b)°

1

1
2
3
4

(a +b)?
(a+ b)*
(a+b)?
(a+b)?

1 1
12 1
13 3 1
146 41

5

(a+b)?

1

5

10

10

5

1

The Binomial Theorem tells us how to use these coefficients to find the entire expanded binomial. To expand

a polynomial in the form of (a + b)”, use the following steps.
1.

Find the row of Pascal’s triangle to use based on the n-value (the power the binomial is raised

to). For example, for (2x + 3)*, n = 4, so we use 4th row of Pascal’s Triangle with 1, 4, 6, 4, and 1.
2.

The numbers in Pascal’s triangle are the coefficients for each term. For (2x + 3)‘, the first
term’s coefficient of 1, the second term’s coefficient of 4, third term’s coefficient is 6, and so on.

3.

The first term is written as a"b°, which simplifies to a”. For (2x + 3)*, the first term is (2x)*,
which simplifies to 16x*.

4.

Aswe move right, we subtract one from a’s exponent and add | to b’s exponent. So, the second

term is C x a" 1b’, where C is the coefficient from Pascal’s triangle. For (2x + 3)*, the second
term is 4(2x)?(3)1, which simplifies to 96x*. Notice how the coefficient of 4 comes from the second
spot in the row in Pascal’s triangle.

5.

6.

Repeat the process for all middle terms. For (2x + 3)*, the third term is 6(2x)*(3)?, which
simplifies to 216x*. The fourth term is 4(2x)1(3)?, which simplifies to 216x.

The last term is written as a°b", which simplifies to b". For (2x + 3)*, the final term is (3)*,
which simplifies to 81.

The fully expanded version of (2x + 3)* is written below.
(2x + 3)* = (2x)* + 4(2x)3(3)1 + 6(2x)7(3)? + 4(2x)'(3)? + (8)*
Notice how the powers of the first term, 2x, count down and the powers of the second term, 3, count up and
how the coefficients come from the 4th row of Pascal’s triangle.
With all terms simplified, we get

(2x + 3)* = 16x* + 96x? + 216x? + 216x + 81

- 307
-

math

Example 7: When (4x — 3)? is expanded and all like terms are combined, what is the coefficient of the
x? term?
A. 64

B. 48

C. 36

D.

16

Solution: The x? term is the first term in the expanded binomial. The first term for a binomial to the third
power is always a?. In this question, the a-value is 4x, so the first term is equal to
(4x)? = 64x3
The answer is A. This is the easy version of these types of questions on the ACT, so a question like this can
appear in the first 20 questions. Make sure you memorize the shortcut rules (steps 3 and 6 on the previous
page) for how to find the first and last terms when expanding binomials to solve any question like this quickly
and easily!

Example 8: What is the coefficient for the x* term in (5x — 2)° when the term is expanded and all like
terms are combined?
A. —2,000

B. —800

C. —200

D. 400

Solution: To find the coefficient of the x? term, we first need to find which row we are using from Pascal’s
triangle. Since the binomial is to the 5th power, we use the 5th row. Now, we need to expand the binomial.

(5x — 2)° = (5x)° + 5(5x)4(—2)! + 10(5x)3 (—2)? + 10(5x)?2(—2)? + 5(5x)1(—2)* + (—2)5
Notice how the powers for the first term in the binomial, the 5x, decrease as we move to the right and the

powers for the second term in the binomial, the —2, increase. The coefficients come from the 5" row of
Pascal’s triangle.

Here, we are looking for the x? term, so we only need to simplify the 10(5x)?(—2)?. Recognizing which
term to simplify can save you a bunch of time on test day! If you get very skilled at the Binomial Theorem,

you can shortcut straight to solving for the x* term, which would mean here you would only have to write
down and solve 10(5x)?(—2)? and none of the other terms we set up above.
We have simplified the entire expression below. You should not take the time to do this on the ACT.

(5x — 2)° = 3,125x° — 6,250x* + 5,000x? — 2,000x? + 400x — 32
The coefficient of the x? term is —2,000. The answer is A.

- 308
-

Chapter 35: Miscellaneous Topics

Visual Spatial
Visual spatial questions ask students to manipulate shapes in two-dimensional and three-dimensional space.
These questions test non-traditional math skills and often challenge students’ problem-solving abilities. We
will go through two examples to show you how the ACT may present these types of questions on test day.
Example 9: What is the total number of edges on the 6-sided dice shown below?
A.

9

B.

10

C.

12

D.

16

Solution: We can first count the edges that we see. For the front side of the dice, we
have 4 edges. To keep track, we would recommend marking the edges as you go.
Here, we will mark the edges we have counted so far with a black line.

I
+

Edges so far = 4

+

t

Next, we can mark the edges on the top of the dice. We have already marked one edge,

1

so we can mark the 3 others. Be sure not to double count edges on a question like this!
Edges so far = 7
Next, we mark the edges on the right side of the dice. We have already marked two
edges, so we mark the 2 others left.
Edges so far = 9

+

+

Now for the hard part. We need to visualize the edges that we cannot see. There are 2

I

more edges that make up the bottom of the dice and 1 more vertical edge on the back

T

left. These edges are shown with the dotted lines.

Total Edges = 12

“|

The answer is C.

Visual spatial questions require you to use your visual spatial skills to manipulate shapes as we did in Example
9. This is only one example of many ways that the ACT can test this skill, but this example 1s a good

introduction to some of the skills you can use that can help you solve these questions correctly. You will see a
variety of other common ways the ACT tests your visual spatial skills in the practice questions.

- 309
-

math

Asymptotes
ymp
An asymptote 1s a line that a function constantly approaches but never touches. You need to know how to find
vertical and horizontal asymptotes for a function.

Vertical Asymptotes

G) Vertical asymptotes occur when the denominator of a rational function is equal to zero. To find where
the vertical asymptotes of a function are, we set the denominator equal to zero and solve. For example,

let’s consider the function f(x) below.

3

PO) = 6x7
To find the vertical asymptotes, set the denominator equal to 0 and solve for the value(s) of x.

x*-—6x-7=0
Here, we have a quadratic, so we can factor.

(x +1)(x
-—7) =0
To find the values of x, set each factor equal and solve.
x+1=0

x-7=0

x=-1
