Chapter 2: Commas - 4 Types of Commas
Commas are the most common type of punctuation on the English Test. In order to successfully handle
comma questions, we need to become familiar with the 4 types of commas that appear on the ACT.
So far, we have already discussed the first two types of commas.

1. Comma + FANBOYS
Correct: My alarm clock did not go off this morning, so I arrived late at school.
Use a comma and a FANBOYS (for, and, nor, but, or, yet, so) to join two independent clauses.

2. Dependent clause followed by independent clause
Correct: While electronic music has become very popular, many people still prefer classic rock.
If a sentence has a dependent clause followed by an independent clause, you must link these with a
comma.

Next, we will learn the other 2 types of commas in English and on the ACT:

3. Unnecessary Information
Commas are used to separate unnecessary information from the rest of the sentence. Information is
unnecessary if we can remove it without fundamentally changing the meaning of the sentence.
Unnecessary information can be as short as a single word or as long as a lengthy phrase.
Example: Mrs. Ellison, who is known for giving pop quizzes, is my least favorite teacher.
Example: The snowboard in the closet, the one with no stickers on it, needs to be waxed.
Example: The basketball team, though, did not mount a comeback this week.

4. Listing
Commas are used when listing more than two items and with lists of multiple adjectives modifying the
same noun.

Example: The group at the picnic table ordered coconut shrimp, hot wings, and onion rings.
Example: The old, limping dog still managed to complete the 3-mile hike.

© PrepPros 2025

-12-

PrepPros ACT English Course

Unnecessary Information Commas
The most common type of comma in English and on the ACT separates unnecessary information from
the rest of the sentence. Information is unnecessary if we can remove the information from the sentence
without fundamentally changing the meaning of the sentence. Unnecessary information can be
before a comma, after a comma, or between two commas.
Sitting behind the table, Mark waited to jump out and surprise his mother.
Dale grabbed his favorite surfboard, the blue and green one, and paddled out.
Buddy the Elf handed his father a bag of spaghetti, his face covered in syrup.
The real winner, however, had yet to be revealed.
In the sentences above, the unnecessary information is underlined. Each of these sentences still works if
we ignore unnecessary information. That’s how we know it is unnecessary and the commas are correct!

TIP - The “Crossing-Out” Trick
For unnecessary information commas, you must be able to completely remove the unnecessary
information from the sentence. After removing the unnecessary information, what remains must still
be a complete sentence that can stand by itself.
To test if information is unnecessary, cross out the information and read the sentence without
it. If you can cross out the information and the sentence still reads as a complete sentence, the
information is unnecessary and needs to be set apart by

acomma or commas. If you cannot cross out

the information, it should not be set apart by any commas.
Let’s test with the sentence below. All three versions are the same sentence, but the commas are in
different locations.
The wooden beam set at an angle, created an optical illusion.
The wooden beam, set at an angle created an optical illusion.
The wooden beam, set at an angle, created an optical illusion.
For the first two sentences, a single comma must set apart the information either before or after it as
unnecessary. Let’s check if these work.
The weeden beam setatananele, created an optical illusion.
The wooden beam set at an angle, ereated-an-opticaltusion.
The wooden beam, setatanangle
created anopticaltusion.
The
weedenbeam, set at an angle created an optical illusion.
Well...none of those work for the first two sentences. Let’s try the third. A pair of commas can either
separate the information between them or the information before and after.
The weeden beam, set at an angle, ereated
an opticaltusion.
The wooden beam, setatanangle, created an optical illusion. (Yes, it works!)
Using this trick can be very helpful on unnecessary information commas questions.

© PrepPros 2025

-13-

PrepPros ACT English Course

Unnecessary vs. Necessary Information
At times, we will also need to determine if information is indeed unnecessary or not. These sentences
are more challenging, but the trick is to delete the portion that may be unnecessary and see if the
sentence loses any critical information. Consider the two sentences below:
Correct: The dresses that need to be hemmed are hanging in the closet.
Correct: Judith, who went to fashion school, designs dresses for a living.
Why do we have no commas in the first sentence and commas for the second? In the first sentence, the

information is necessary. If we just say, “the dresses are hanging in the closet,” then we do not know
which specific dresses we are talking about. In the second sentence, we already know who designs the
dresses, so the information about Judith going to fashion school is unnecessary.

The Names Rule
The ACT loves to ask you how to properly punctuate names. You are almost guaranteed to see at least
one commas and names question on test day. You have probably seen names written both with and
without commas...so what’s the difference? Both versions below are correct: see if you can figure out
why.
Correct: My friend Kelly recently moved to London.
Correct: My best friend, Andrew, is a certified scuba diver.
The names rule has to do with specificity. If the identifier before the name is not specific to one
person (friend, American physicist, Olympic gold medalist, high school principal), the name is
necessary, and there is no comma between the identifier and the name.
If the identifier is specific to one person (best friend, youngest sister, Amazon CEO), the name is
unnecessary information, and there are commas around the name.
In the first sentence, Kelly is necessary because without her name we do not know which friend recently
moved to London.

In the second sentence, Andrew is unnecessary because a person can only have one

best friend. We do not need the name Andrew to know who we are talking about.
Names Rule Practice: Determine if the names below need commas or not.

bDFYONPW

Award-winning teacher Mrs. Saunders helped me become a much better writer.
Broadway producer Jeffrey Seller is best known for the huge hit Hamilton.
Eric’s mother Louisa cheered from the bleachers.
Italian cyclist Marco Pantani won the Tour de France in 1998.
Famous American entrepreneur Elon Musk is a proponent of bitcoin.
The CEO of Tesla Elon Musk has revolutionized the car industry.
Grammy winner Arianna Grande is releasing a new album next month.
The oldest Hemswroth brother Luke Hemsworth starred in HBO’s Westworld.

© PrepPros 2025

-14-

PrepPros ACT English Course

“That” vs. “Which” Phrases
Phrases that start with “that” never get commas. Phrases that start with “which” always get
commas. “That” phrases are always necessary information to the sentence while “which” phrases are
always unnecessary information.
Correct: The dogs that live down the street are always barking.
Correct: My neighbor’s dogs, which are always barking, love to play fetch.

Anytime you see “which,” there must be a comma right in front of it. The exception to this rule is
when “which” is part of a prepositional phrase like “on which,” “in which” or “of which.” For any of these
or other similar cases, you do not use a comma. Some examples are below:
Correct: The table on which the food was resting tipped over.
Correct: The table, which the food was resting on, tipped over.

“ing” and “ed” Phrases
Phrases that start with “ing” and “ed” may or may not be separated with commas. To determine if these
phrases, which are called participle phrases, get commas or not, determine if the information in the

phrase is necessary to the sentence or not. On the ACT, “ing” and “ed” phrases most commonly
appear with commas and are unnecessary information.
Correct: Excited for the car ride, Jane’s bulldog started to jump up and down.
Correct: Jane’s bulldog, excited for the car ride, started to jump up and down.
Correct: Marcus applied for the internship, hoping that he would get the position.
Correct: Judy laid down, exhausted from the long workout.

“ing” and “ed” phrases can also be necessary information when the phrase is helping to specify who or
what the noun is. If the phrase is necessary, there are no commas.
Correct: The politician waving to the crowd is predicted to win the election.
Correct: The yoga pants advertised on the front page of the website were sold out.

In the first example, “waving to the crowd” is helping to specify which politician is predicted to win the
election. In the second example, “advertised on the front page of the website” is specifying which yoga
pants are sold out. Without these phrases, we would not know which specific politician or yoga pants
are being referred to.

Phrases with “Who” or “Whom”
When talking about a person, you must always use “who” or “whom’ to start the phrase. You can
never use “that” to describe a person. “Who” or “whom” can act like a “that” or a “which” phrase, so
these ones are a bit trickier with commas. We will cover “who vs. whom” later in the pronouns chapter.
Incorrect:

The children that were playing soccer did not notice the ice cream truck.

Correct: The children who were playing soccer did not notice the ice cream truck.
Correct: Dr. Roberts, who was my childhood doctor, waved to me at the supermarket.

© PrepPros 2025

-15-

PrepPros ACT English Course

Prepositional Phrases
Prepositional phrases are phrases consisting ofa preposition and its object. Some of the most common
prepositions on the ACT are listed below:

in

of

to

for

with

on

at

from

by

about

as

into

like

through

after

over

between

during

before

among

around

Prepositional phrases at the front of the sentence are always followed by a comma. We can think
of these phrases as unnecessary information that we can cross out.
Correct: On my way to work, | listened to my new favorite podcast.
Correct: After cleaning the garage, Ralph started weeding the garden.
Prepositional phrases in the middle or end of a sentence almost never have commas around
them. Most prepositional phrases contain essential information that helps specify the noun that the
prepositional phrase is modifying and therefore is necessary.
Correct: The clothing on the bed is for vacation. The clothing on the floor is being donated.
Without the prepositional phrases, we would not know which clothing is for vacation and which is being
donated. Here are some more examples:
Correct: The display of affection by Lewis to his prom date made her blush.
Correct: The bouquet of lilies in the vase is going to be displayed on the table.
On the ACT, 99% of prepositional phrases do not have commas like the examples above, so in
general you should never put commas around a prepositional phrase.
Prepositional phrases in the middle or end of a sentence only get comma(s) if they contain
unnecessary information.
Correct: My mother, with her love of Easter, organized a massive Easter egg hunt.
Incorrect: The magician had a rabbit, in his hat.
Here, the first prepositional phrase is unnecessary because we already know which mother we are
talking about. The second prepositional phrase is necessary since it specifies which rabbit we are
talking about, so there should be no comma. Prepositional phrases that are unnecessary almost
never come up on the ACT.
Prepositional Phrases Practice: Underline all prepositional phrases. Add commas if necessary.
1.

Before the race began the team did a final check on the sparkplugs in the engine.

2.

Donations for the campaign in Georgia broke records during the 2020 election.

3.

The luxury dog bed with the ornate frame and supportive memory foam seemsa bit excessive to
me.

4.

During the movie Davonta’s mother went to the concession stand for some popcorn.
At the corner the host stood with a microphone in her hand.

© PrepPros 2025

-16-

PrepPros ACT English Course

Punctuation for Transitional Words and Phrases Like “However”
On the ACT, there are certain words and short phrases that often give students trouble on grammar
questions. These words are technically called conjunctive adverbs (you do NOT need to know that).

We prefer to just think of these as transitional words and phrases like “however.” Below is a list of
the most commonly tested ones:

However

Though

Therefore

Instead

Likewise

Nevertheless

Regardless

Moreover

Subsequently

Furthermore

In addition

As a result

Of course

Otherwise

For example

There are three ways that these transitional words and phrases can appear in a correctly punctuated
sentence.

1. At the front of the sentence followed by a comma.
Correct: However, the truth would not be revealed until next week.
Correct: As a result, the student was sent to the principal’s office.
This is another example of unnecessary information. For both of these sentences, we can cross out
the transitional word or phrase and are left with a complete sentence.
2. Separated by commas in the middle of a sentence.
Correct: The truth, however, would not be revealed until next week.
Correct: The student, as a result, was sent to the principal’s office.
Again, this is unnecessary information. We can cross out the transitional word or phrase and read
the rest of the sentence as one complete sentence.
3. Separated by a semicolon and a comma when between two independent clauses.

Correct: I expected to pay over $100 for my new hiking boots; however, I found a sale and got
them for half of the original price.
Correct: The player demanded his coach for more playing time; in addition, he threatened to
quit if he did not get his way.
If there is an independent clause before and after the transitional word or phrase, we need to use a
semicolon and a comma for punctuation.

© PrepPros 2025

-17-

PrepPros ACT English Course

TIP - How to Spot Unnecessary Information Commas Questions
Unnecessary information commas questions always have two defining characteristics:
1.

The words in all 4 answer choices are the exact same.

2.

The only difference in the answer choices is where commas are located.

On the ACT, unnecessary information commas questions look like this:

Electric vehicles, thousands of them,

1.

Which choice makes the sentence
most grammatically acceptable?

already on the road in America, are one

of the fastest growing industries in the
world.

A.

NO CHANGE

B.

thousands, of them

C.

thousands of them

D.

thousands of, them

Anytime we see a question like this, we are dealing with an unnecessary information commas

question and should use the “crossing-out” trick. Be sure to read the entire sentence and pay
attention to any other commas that are not in the underlined portion! Any commas that we
cannot change are often important clues that we must use to find the correct answer. It is possible
the other comma rules are part of a question like this as well, so make sure to read the entire
sentence and look out for the sentence structure rules from Chapter 1.

In the example above, the answer is C because the phrase “thousands of them already on the road in
America” is unnecessary information and is separated by two commas.

Backup Trick - Pauses and Commas
Read the sentence out loud (or “out loud” in your head on test day) to help identify where commas are
necessary. If you need to take a short pause for a breath, then you likely need a comma.

Read the

example below out loud and put commas where you take a short pause:
Originally from Maine Mr. Johnson who has taught 8 grade biology for five years is not
accustomed to winters in San Diego.
Pausing is not one of our 4 commas rules! Many students mistakenly put commas anywhere they
pause in sentence. At times, this is a great trick. However, this can also lead to mistakes. You should
only using pausing as a backup trick when you have already used our other commas rules and
still cannot tell which answer choice is correct.
For the example above, the correct version is below:
Correct: Originally from Maine, Mr. Johnson, who has taught 8" grade biology for five years, is
not accustomed to winters in San Diego.

© PrepPros 2025

-18-

PrepPros ACT English Course

Commas Practice: Add commas where necessary. The commas in the sentences below can be any of
the first 3 types of commas we have learned so far.
1.

Although James demanded pizza for dinner his mother decided to make grilled chicken and
broccoli instead.
Mr. Alvin a very popular teacher among the students cancelled the final exam.
I could not believe that Deadpool was such a popular movie.
While my friend Mary thought that dolphins were the fastest animals in water she was surprised
to learn it was actually a sailfish.
Owls notorious for their amazing night vision have fantastic hearing at night so they can actually
hear their prey from hundreds of feet away even if they cannot see it.
On second thought the real reason that I did not like Scott was his lack of honesty.
Some cultures though enjoy bizarre foods like bugs or snakes.
After graduating Darren played for the San Diego Padres where he had a long career as a relief
pitcher.
Because he was the best in Dallas award-winning head chef Phillip Small owned multiple very
successful restaurants.

10.

My favorite author is J.K. Rowling who is famous for writing the Harry Potter series.

11.

The fisherman carrying their catch walked into the Seattle fish market a place famous for how
the vendors throw fish to entertain customers.

12.

At first glance the cuttlefish which can change colors to blend into its surroundings looked just
like the brain coral behind it and I did not see it in the tank.

13.

Last summer the local flooding caused by a breach in the Reynolds Dam caused over ten
thousand dollars in damage to the children’s park.

14.

The basil plant for example needs full sunlight but cilantro grows best in partial sunlight.

© PrepPros 2025

-19-

PrepPros ACT English Course

Listing Commas
The easiest types of commas on the English Test are listing commas. Listing commas can appear in a
multiple item list and between list of multiply adjectives describing the same noun.

Commas and Lists
Listing commas are used to separate the items in a list of 3 or more items.
Correct: I went to the grocery store to pick up chicken, cheese, and bread.
Correct: I went to the grocery store to pick up chicken, cheese and bread.
The final comma in a list of items is called the Oxford comma. Use of the Oxford comma is stylistic, so
technically both lists with and without the Oxford comma are correct. As a result, the Oxford comma
alone will never make an answer choice correct or incorrect on the ACT. Most commonly, the ACT
includes the Oxford comma like the top example above.
Lists must have 3 or more items to include commas. Be sure that you do not use commas ina list of
just two items.

Incorrect: The food was both incredibly savory, and overwhelmingly satisfying.
Correct: The food was both incredibly savory and overwhelmingly satisfying.

Incorrect: Mike cashed out his winnings, and then headed back to his hotel room for a nap.
Correct: Mike cashed out his winnings and then headed back to his hotel room for a nap.

TIP —- FANBOYS vs. Lists
Be careful of the FANBOYS (and, but, nor, or) that can be used in a list. It is easy to confuse a two-item
list (which does not need a comma) with a comma + FANBOYS between two independent clauses
(which does need a comma). For acomma and a FANBOYS, make sure the second half of the sentence
is an independent clause.
Incorrect: The debate team took first place in California, and then won the grand prize for the
entire nation.

Correct: The debate team took first place in California and then won the grand prize for the
entire nation.

Incorrect: Andrew left to get his suit from the tailor but he forgot and just grabbed a
cheeseburger at In-n-Out.
Correct: Andrew left to get his suit from the tailor, but he forgot and just grabbed a
cheeseburger at In-n-Out

© PrepPros 2025

-20-

PrepPros ACT English Course

Adjective Lists with and without Commas
Listing commas are also used to separate a list of multiple adjectives modifying the same noun.
Correct: The wet, smelly dog was excited for the car ride home.
Correct: The narrow, winding, treacherous roads through the mountains are difficult to drive.
On more difficult questions, we will need to know when to use commas in lists of adjectives and when
commas are not necessary. Take a look at the two correct examples below to learn the difference.
Correct: A cup of delicious, strong coffee is my favorite thing in the morning.
Correct: My mother has lots of bright floral furniture in her living room.
The rule is a simple one: if you can switch the order of the adjectives without changing the meaning
of the sentence, put a comma between the adjectives. If switching the order of the adjectives
changes the meaning of the sentence or just makes no sense, there is no comma between the
adjectives. In short, if you can switch the adjectives, puta comma. No switch, no comma.

In the first sentence, the two adjectives “delicious” and “strong” are separated by

acomma. Both of

these adjectives describe the coffee on their own. We could switch the adjectives around to “strong,
delicious coffee” without changing the meaning. Since we can switch the adjectives, we need a comma.

In the second sentence, the two adjectives “bright” and “floral” are not separated by a comma because
they build on one another and together modify the noun. If we switch the adjectives to “floral bright
furniture,” the meaning of the sentence is changed. Saying “bright floral furniture” makes senses but
saying “floral bright furniture” does not. Since we cannot switch the adjectives, we do not add a comma.

TIP - “The Switching Trick”
When you see multiple adjectives modifying a noun, switch the order of the adjectives to test whether
or not you need a comma between the adjectives. Let’s use these two sentences as examples:
The sweet cold ice cream was refreshing after a day at the beach.
Elliot had to take off his stainless steel necklace before the swim meet.
To test whether these adjectives need a comma between them, switch the order and see if the
sentences still make sense.
The cold sweet ice cream was refreshing after a day at the beach.
Elliot had to take off his steel stainless chain before the swim meet.

In the first sentence, switching “cold” and “sweet” does not change the meaning, so we need a comma.
In the second sentence, “steel stainless chain” does not work, so we do not need

acomma. The correct

versions of both sentences are below:
Correct: The sweet, cold ice cream was refreshing after a day at the beach.
Correct: Elliot had to take off his stainless steel chain before the swim meet.

© PrepPros 2025

-2?1-

PrepPros ACT English Course

Adjectives Lists With and Without Commas Practice: Add commas where necessary. Commas may
or may not be necessary.
1.

Scientists are trying to determine what animal the newly discovered fossilized bones are from.

2.

The white fluffy clouds floated quickly by in the crisp evening wind.
The big sun bear is known for climbing the fence and swimming in the heated community pool
in the spring.

HONWD

The cunning sneaky red foxes got into the chicken coop again last night.
The powerful liquid detergent makes my dirty sweaty clothes smell so much better.
My car engine made an annoying rattling sound right before breaking down.
The local hot air balloon company specializes in making colorful creative designs.
Laura placed an order for Italian coffee beans and three expensive ceramic coffee mugs.

© PrepPros 2025

-22-

PrepPros ACT English Course

Commas Practice: Which answer choices are correct? Select all that apply.
1.

The diners

sat down.

a.

ordered food and

b.

ordered food, and

c.

ordered food, and they

2.

will pre-order the tickets to Coachella.
a.

Claire, Elizabeth or Bella

b.

Claire, Elizabeth, or Bella
Claire, Elizabeth, or Bella,

3.

The

forced the commander to declare war.
a.

invasion by the rebel forces

b.

invasion, by the rebel forces
invasion, by the rebel forces,

4.

The

was given first prize by the judges.
a.

bright pink hot air balloon

b.

bright, pink hot air balloon
bright, pink, hot air balloon

5.

6.

7.

Nancy laid down in the
a.

hammock and immediately fell asleep.

b.

hammock, and she immediately fell asleep.

c.

hammock, and immediately fell asleep.

Iwillneeda
a.

sweet cold lemonade

b.

sweet, and cold lemonade

c.

sweet, cold lemonade

Itis important to

to drink after the race.

shelter.

a.

keep calm during an earthquake, and seek

b.

keep calm, during an earthquake, and seek

c.

keep calm during an earthquake and seek

© PrepPros 2025

-23-

PrepPros ACT English Course

Commas, Sentence Structure, and Unnecessary Information
Now that we have learned about sentence structure and commas, let’s see the most common ways that a
sentence can be structured using commas or when no commas are necessary. We will add on to the 5
rules we already learned in Chapter 1 (page 7).
1.

Comma + FANBOYS joining 2 Independent Clauses

The researchers changed their approach, and they created a new medical procedure in the process.
Independent clause
2.

Independent clause

Independent Clause followed by Unnecessary Information Phrase (comma)

The researchers changed their approach, creating a new medical procedure in the process.
Independent clause
3.

Unnecessary information

Unnecessary Information Phrase before Independent Clause (comma)

Determined to find a cure, the researchers changed their approach.
Unnecessary information
4.

Independent clause

Dependent Clause followed by Independent Clause (comma)

Since they were determined to find a cure, the researchers changed their approach.
Dependent clause
5.

Independent clause

Unnecessary Information Phrase, Independent Clause, Unnecessary Information Phrase
(2 commas)

Determined to find a cure, the researchers changed their approach, creating a new medical
Unnecessary information

Independent clause

Unnecessary

procedure in the process.
information
6.

Independent Clause with Necessary Information (no comma)

The researchers changed their approach by creating a new medical procedure.
Independent clause
7.

Necessary information

List with 2 items (no comma)

The researchers changed their approach and created a new medical procedure in the process.
*this sentence functions as one big independent clause.
8.

Unnecessary Information Phrase, Unnecessary Information Phrase, Independent Clause
(2 commas)

Despite the company’s efforts, which included offering a 75% refund and a replacement purse,
Unnecessary information

Unnecessary information

Claire was still disappointed with her Chanel purse.
Independent clause
9.

Dependent Clause, Independent Clause, Unnecessary Information (2 commas)

As the curtains closed, the crowd stood and applauded, many with tears in their eyes.
Dependent clause

© PrepPros 2025

Independent clause

-24-

Unnecessary information

PrepPros ACT English Course

These 9 sentence structures cover the most common ways that sentences appear on the ACT, but this is
not a complete list. Unnecessary information can appear in the middle of clauses or other unnecessary
information, so there can be many more possible sentence structures than the 9 listed on the
previous page. However, if you understand the 9 most common sentence structures, you will be very
well prepared to deal with even the most difficult sentences on the ACT.

TIP - The “1-Comma’” Rule
This brings us to our final sentence structure and commas rule: when a sentence has only one comma
in the middle, there must be an independent clause before or after the comma but not both and
not neither. The only exception to this rule is a comma + FANBOYS linking two independent
sentences. If before and after are both independent, we have a comma splice. If neither is independent,
we have a sentence fragment.
If the first half of the sentence before the comma is independent, the information after the comma must
be unnecessary information (rule 2 on the previous page). If the second half of the sentence after the
comma is independent, the first half must be unnecessary information (rule 3) or a dependent clause
(rule 4). This rule helps you answer some of the most difficult sentence structure/commas questions
correctly!
Chapter 2 Practice:
Before graduating from college William, a

;

1.

1

A. NO CHANGE

B. college, William, a computer science major

computer science major, dropped out to start his

dropped

own company. :

C. college William a computer science major,
dropped
D. college, William, a computer science major,

Alth

;

-

dropped

ough his research was not finished, Dr. Bates
2

hoped to prove that his bone cancer treatment

2.

2

A. NO CHANGE

B. finished, Dr. Bates hoped to prove, that

was the next big breakthrough.

C. finished Dr. Bates hoped to prove that

D. finished, Dr. Bates, hoped to prove that
Sandra has big plans for her career in politics,

3.

A. NO CHANGE

including running for Mayor serving as state

B. running for Mayor, serving as state

Governor and getting elected to Congress.

C. running for Mayor and also serving as

3

state Governor and getting elected to

3

Governor, and getting elected to Congress.

Congress.

D. running for Mayor, to serve as state
Governor, and getting elected to Congress.
Claude Monet is known for his incredible
4

. NO CHANGE

vVOWD>
>VOW

detailed oil paintings of natural landscapes.

. incredibly and detailed oil

4

incredible, detailed, oil

. incredible, detailed oil

. NO CHANGE

A group of lions is called a pride, however, my

. pride; however,

5

grandpa insists on calling it a herd instead.

pride however

. pride however,

© PrepPros 2025

-25-

PrepPros ACT English Course

. NO CHANGE

The biology teacher assigned the chapter in the
4

. chapter, in the textbook, on photosynthesis

textbook, on photosynthesis, for homework and

for homework,

4

chapter, in the textbook on photosynthesis

asked the students to review the basics of

for homework,

genetics.

. chapter in the textbook on photosynthesis
for homework

. NO CHANGE

vVOoW>D

. scientist, William Dubrovsky, and the

The cover page noted the impressive
achievements of scientist William Dubrovsky
7

and the breakthrough in the new radiology
7

techniques that a team from Korea discovered.

scientist William Dubrovsky, and the
. scientist (William Dubrovsky), and the

. NO CHANGE

. car, so she; consequently, was

My youngest sister, Kate, was so determined to
win the pinewood derby race that she hid
weights inside of her car, so she, consequently,
8

was disqualified.

car; so she, consequently was
. car, so she consequently, was

. NO CHANGE

8

vVOoUmWrDF

. astronaut, Neil Armstrong

9

known as the first man to walk on the moon,
10

astronaut, Neil Armstrong,

. astronaut Neil Armstrong,

United States astronaut Neil Armstrong is best
10.

. NO CHANGE

. moon, but

although some people believe that the moon
10

moon, although,

. moon but

landing was a hoax.
11.

. NO CHANGE

LSVOW

. University, with a unique curriculum,

Claire chose to attend Cedar Brook University,

. University which has a unique, curriculum

11

. University which has a unique curriculum,

which has a unique curriculum that does not
11

assign letter grades but instead emphasizes the
academic growth of its students.

12.

. NO CHANGE

. English architect, Andrew Rollins, and
Swiss engineer, Melissa Voss, worked
. English architect Andrew Rollins and Swiss

English architect Andrew Rollins, and Swiss

Engineer Melissa Voss worked

12

. English architect Andrew Rollins and

engineer Melissa Voss worked together to design

Swiss engineer Melissa Voss, worked

12

the new ten-story luxury apartment building
13

that will be completed by the end of next

13.

. NO CHANGE

D>VOW

. new, ten-story luxury apartment,

summer.

new, ten-story, luxury, apartment

. hew ten-story, luxury apartment,

© PrepPros 2025

-26-

PrepPros ACT English Course

After making the diving touchdown catch,

14.

14

. NO CHANGE

L}UASW

. catch, Keenan Allan, jumped

Keenan Allan jumped into the stands to celebrate
14

catch, Keenan Allan jumping

. catch, Keenan Allan, jumping

with the fans, injured his ankle.

For the kite surfing competition, twenty identical

15.

. beach, testing them

kites were brought to the beach tested to ensure
15

each competitor.

16.

16

16

onto a slice of bread, had a brilliant idea.
17.
17

17

than recognition.

When the Gravitron, which debuted in 1983,
18

fairgoers across the country were offered a thrill
ride that they had never experienced before.

There are thousands of new bacteria identified

Danish immigrant, dropping

. Danish immigrant was dropping

immigrant dropped a meat patty accidentally

psychologists believe is, to study for recall rather

. NO CHANGE

. Danish immigrant, dropped

was invented 100 years ago when a Danish

The key to retaining information properly,

beach, tested

. beach to test them

that they all worked properly, and given out to

It was a long-held belief that the first hamburger

. NO CHANGE

. NO CHANGE

. properly psychologists believe is
properly, psychologists believe is

. properly, psychologists believe, is

. NO CHANGE

>vow

19. A. NO CHANGE

Scientists say there are thousands of

each year, the vast majority are found in

new bacteria

OM

agricultural fields.

suckerfish, starts a symbiotic relationship with
the shark, latching onto the shark for free rides
20

across the ocean.

© PrepPros 2025

Gravitron that debuted

. Gravitron, debuting

19

In order to survive, the Remora, also called a

Gravitron debuted

20.

Of the thousands of new bacteria
. Bacteria in the thousands are

. NO CHANGE

voOWD>

. shark; latching
shark. Latching

. shark and latching

PrepPros ACT English Course

The personal trainer, organizing the 5K run

21. A. NO CHANGE

B. trainer organizing the 5K run

2

}

decided to put an advertisement for his business

C. trainer, organizing the 5K run

at the finish line.

D. trainer, organizing the 5K run,

Creole cuisine has many distinctive qualities;
22. A. NO CHANGE
B. quality, that is the

however, professional chefs say the cuisine’s real

identifying quality, the blend of West African,

. ivality, which s the

French, and Southern foods.

The infamous graffiti_artist, Josh Bridgewater,

23. A. NO CHANGE

230

B. artist (Josh Bridgewater),

who in 2017 completed a full mural with his

C.

signature caricatures of the city’s most

artist Josh Bridgewater

D. artist Josh Bridgewater,

prominent individuals, is always finding new
ways to attract attention to issues that he cares
about.

Sun exposure plays an important role in snakes’

24, A. NO CHANGE

abilities to regulate their body temperatures; in

B. temperatures, this helps
C. temperatures; therefore, helping

effect, helping snakes survive in both warmer

D. temperatures, helping

24

.

24

,

;

J

and cooler climates.

In rare instances, however the 16 seed can

25. A. NO CHANGE

25
advance during March Madness.

B. instances; however,
C. instances, however,
D. instances however

For example, one species of falcon, the peregrine

26. A. NO CHANGE

26
which is among the best hunters in the world.

B. falcon, the peregrine, which
C. falcon, the peregrine
.

26

,

,

D. falcon the peregrine that

The construction crew finished the bridge

27. A. NO CHANGE

enamiins

enabling runners to P pass over the river and use

B.C. bridge;
enabling
bridge and this enabled

the path on the other side as well.

D. bridge; this enabled

© PrepPros 2025

-28-

PrepPros ACT English Course

