Chapter 13: Which Choice
“Which choice” questions ask you to make changes to a sentence or portions of a sentence. The changes
that should be made will be detailed in the questions itself. These questions are very easy to spot: the

question will always have the words “which choice” (more common) or “which one” (less
common) in the question.

For “which choice” questions, your job is to figure out exactly what the question is asking you to do
and select the answer choice that does that. Do not worry about grammar, conciseness, or style,
as these are never tested on these questions unless the question specifically asks about grammar,

conciseness, or style. For “which choice” questions, shorter is NOT always better.
The first type of “which choice” question asks you to make a specific change to the sentence. For
these questions, focus on the sentence you are being asKed to edit. You should still read the sentences
before and after the underlined portion, but you often will not need to rely too much on the context.

The first home refrigerators were patented in

Which choice most specifically describes what
was used to build iceboxes?

the 1920s. Before their invention, Americans

A. NO CHANGE

kept their food cold in iceboxes, which required

B. which were only cold enough to keep food

ice to be bought and placed into the box each

C

cool but not freeze anything.
. wooden boxes with tin and insulated with
cork and sawdust.

week.

D. the very first invention that allowed
people to keep food cold in their houses.

Notice that all of the answer choices are grammatically correct. Your job here is to pick the answer that

“most specifically describes what was used to build iceboxes.” Therefore, the answer must be C since it
is the only answer choice that has any information about the materials used to build iceboxes.

Whenever he was at the toy store, Harold

Which choice most clearly emphasizes how the
dinosaurs increase in size?

always begged his Mom for some of the

A. NO CHANGE

grow-in-water dinosaurs that sprawl when

B. change in size

laced i

placed

C. expand

into water.

D. soak

Again, notice that all four answers choices are grammatically correct. To answer this question, we must

focus on which answer choice “emphasizes how the dinosaurs increase in size.” Therefore, the answer
choice C is correct, as “expand” highlights how the dinosaurs increase in size.

TIP - Don’t Overthink It. Just Answer the Question!
For “which choice” questions, just answer the question that the ACT is asking. It’s that simple! We
cannot stress this enough. As long as you approach these questions correctly, they should be easy.
This is particularly important for the questions about specific details. For example, if the questions asks,

“which answer choice best highlights the colors of autumn,” pick the answer choice that has colors in it.
For the majority of the “which choice” questions, it’s really that easy!

© PrepPros 2025

-102-

PrepPros ACT English Course

The second type of “which choice” question asks you to select the correct sentence based on the
context in the passage. Most commonly, you need to select the correct introduction, conclusion, or
transition. For these questions, you will need to read for context. In general, it is good practice to
read the 2 sentences before and the 2 sentences after, but you may need to read more than that for
certain questions. When first reading for context, ignore the underlined portion.

Focus on where the question is directing you to read. If the question asks, “which choice best
introduces the paragraph,” you need to read the entire paragraph before selecting your answer. The
most common mistake students make is answering the question before reading the entire paragraph. If
you do that, you do not really know what the paragraph is about yet and can very easily pick the
incorrect answer.

Recently, many businesses have been adding

Given that all the choices are accurate, which
choice provides the best conclusion to the

color to the workplace to boost employee

paragraph?

morale and creativeness. Blue and green help

A. NO CHANGE

employees feel calm and hopeful, red

B. Painting the walls or putting up artwork

;

;

can both successfully bring color to the

stimulates employees to be more creative, and

office

yellow inspires good memories. Selecting the
‘ht

TBA

col

hel

‘mize

cofors Cal het p taxtze

th

C. Orange can help increase employee’s

fits f

enthusiasm.

sac promsser

D. It may seem simple but selecting the right

shareholders.

colors can really brighten the office.

This example requires you to think about the paragraph as a whole. The first two sentences of the
paragraph focus on the relationship between colors and the workplace. In order to properly conclude
the paragraph, the answer choice must summarize the discussion about colors and the workplace. The
correct answer D is the only one that properly concludes the paragraph.

In the Mona Lisa, one of Da Vinci’s best-

Which of the following true statements, if

as
known paintings, the viewers feel as if the

added here, would draw a conclusion most
,;
;
consistent with the rest of the paragraph?

