Chapter 7: Parallel Structure
Parallel structure is the repetition of a chosen grammatical form within a sentence as items are
listed or compared. The items in a list can be words, phrases, or clauses. Whenever we see items ina
list or a comparison between items, we must make sure the items have parallel structure.

Parallel Structure and Lists
The items in any list must be written with the same grammatical form. [tems must be all nouns, all
verbs, and so on. When lists are written with proper parallel structure, the sentence flows more

smoothly and sounds better. As a result, many students can “hear” which answer choice is the correct
without even realizing they are being tested on parallel structure.
Incorrect: To protect her fragile hands, Julia will not rake the leaves, wash the dishes, and has
decided she will not take out the trash.
Correct: To protect her fragile hands, Julia will not rake the leaves, wash the dishes, or take out
the trash.

Incorrect: Elon Musk is known for self-driving cars and pioneering the SpaceX program.
Correct: Elon Musk is known for self-driving cars and the SpaceX program.
Correct: Elon Musk is known for manufacturing self-driving cars and pioneering the SpaceX
program.

Incorrect:

After calling in sick to school, Charlie hoped to get excused from class, receiving an
extension on his homework assignment, and spend the afternoon watching movies at
home.

Correct: After calling in sick to school, Charlie hoped to get excused from class, receive an
extension on his homework assignment, and spend the afternoon watching movies at
home.

No matter how simple or complex the items in the list are, they must be parallel. Lists of 3 or more

items are easier to spot, and you will be able to more obviously “hear” which answer choice is correct or
incorrect. Lists of 2, however, are more difficult to spot and can often sound good to us even if they are
not parallel. Be aware of parallel structure anytime you seea list of 2 on the ACT, as this is a topic
that tricks many students when it appears on test day.
Parallel Structure and Lists Practice: Correct the parallel structure errors in the sentences below:
1.

Theresa was expecting a visit from her mother, so she made her bed, cleaning the shelves of the
refrigerator, and swept the kitchen floor.

2.

Attempting to sneak out of the house, Janice grabbed her phone, her purse, and wallet and then
was climbing out the back window.

3.

Chevy, our golden retriever, chews on the furniture, he barks at the neighbors, and thinks his
shadow is real.

4.

It’s harder to lift the couch by myself than lifting it with some friends.
I would rather get free music with commercials than paying for music with no commercials.

© PrepPros 2025

-71-

PrepPros ACT English Course

Special Cases for Parallel Structure
In addition to lists, there are also certain other special cases for parallel structure. These special cases,
which are officially called correlative conjunctions, must have the same grammatical structure for both
parts of the conjunctions.
Keep an eye out for these ones on the ACT:
Neither

nor __

Either or __

Notonly___ butalso___

Both ___ and

In all of these special cases, the “blanks” must be parallel. For example:
Incorrect: My mother not only took away my keys but also she locked them in the safe.
Correct: My mother not only took away my keys but also locked them in the safe.

In the incorrect example, “took away my Keys” is not parallel with “she locked them in the safe.” Since
the “she” is not in the first part, it cannot be in the second part. In the correct version, “took away my
keys” is parallel with “locked them in the safe.”
Special Cases for Parallel Structure Practice: Correct the parallel structure errors.
1.

Bothascholar and quite athletic, Sylvia got a scholarship to row crew in college.

2.

The news report is neither accurate nor written fairly.

3.

Neither scolding the child nor attempts to bribe him helped to calm him down.

4.

The haunted house not only required participants to sign a waiver before entering but also
asking them to turn their phones off for the entire experience.

5.

Forms of payment accepted are either cash or sending payment with Venmo.

TIP - How to Spot Parallel Structure and Lists Questions
Parallel structure and lists questions always have the following defining characteristic:
1.

The sentence includes a list of two or more items.

Anytime there is a list, we will need to

consider parallel structure. Keep an eye out for list of two, as these can be difficult to notice
errors with parallel structure.
On the ACT, parallel structure and lists questions look like this:
The responsibilities of the coffee packer

1.

Which choice makes the sentence most

position included packing the coffee beans,

grammatically acceptable?

which have been roasted, and keeping the

A.

work area around the machine clean and

a Kept.

orderly.

D. having kept

NO CHANGE

In the example above, the answer is A. The list of two responsibilities, “packing the beans” and
“keeping the work area around the machine clean and orderly” must be parallel. “Packing” and
“keeping” match and have correct parallel structure.

© PrepPros 2025

-72-

PrepPros ACT English Course

Parallel Structure and Comparisons
For any comparisons, the items being compared must be parallel. Comparing without proper
parallel structure can lead to unintended or incorrect comparisons. In other words, make sure you are
comparing apples to apples and not apples to oranges. A common fix to parallel structure mistakes is to

add “those of” or “that of” or other similar variations before the second item in the comparison.
If you ever see “those of’ or “that of’ or a similar variation in a question, the question is likely
testing parallel structure.

If you see any commonly used comparison words such as “more,” “less,” “better,” “worse,” and
“than,” there is a comparison, and you will need to consider parallel structure.
Incorrect: The fried chicken at Chick-fil-A is much better than Popeyes.
Correct: The fried chicken at Chick-fil-A is better than the fried chicken at Popeyes.
Correct: The fried chicken at Chick-fil-A is better than Popeyes’ fried chicken.
Correct: The fried chicken at Chick-fil-A is better than that at Popeyes.
Parallel Structure and Comparisons Practice: Correct the parallel structure errors.
1.

Unlike Mr. Rodriguez, Mr. Allen’s math exams are curved, so everyone gets a better grade.

2.

There was no mystery greater than the left shoe thief at my high school.

3.

Walter stands by his bold claim that Michael Jordan’s shoes are better than all current NBA
players.

4.

Unlike the 2014 World Cup in Brazil, the teams at the 2010 World Cup in South Africa had to deal
with the constant noise from the vuvuzela horns.

TIP - How to Spot Parallel Structure and Comparisons Questions
Parallel structure and comparison questions always have at least one of the following defining
characteristics:

1.

A commonly used comparison word such as “more,” “less,” “better,” “worse,” and “than’
is in the answer choices or in the sentence. Anytime there is a comparison, we need to
keep an eye out for parallel structure.

2.

The phrase “that of’ or “those of’ or a similar variation (“that in,

nt

those at,” etc.) is in

any of the answer choices.
On the ACT, parallel structure and comparisons questions look like this:

Victoria concluded that the juiciness of
fuji apples is a better indicator for the
flavor than for a bosc pear.

1.

Which choice makes the sentence most
grammatically acceptable?

A.

NO CHANGE

B.

than of bosc pears.

C.

than for that of bosc pears.

D.

then bosc pears.

Whenever you see a comparison, make sure you know exactly what is being compared. I[n this

example, the comparison is between “the juiciness of fuji apples” and “the juiciness of bosc pears.” We
must compare the juiciness of the fuji apple to the juiciness of the bosc pears and not to the pear itself.

The only answer that does this is C, where “that of bosc pears” is short for “the juiciness of bosc pears.”

© PrepPros 2025

-73-

i

PrepPros ACT English Course

Chapter 7 Practice:
Studies have shown that the secrets to achieving

GOD

true happiness are strengthening your closest

if you take
taking

. to take

relationships and take care of yourself mentally
1

and physically.

At birth, baby birds get all of their nutrients by

>GOW

staying in the nest and they eat directly from
2

NO CHANGE

which they eat
and eating

. that eat

their parents’ mouths.

GOD

Manny not only overcame his fear of standing in
front of large crowds but_also became the best
3

NO CHANGE

he also became
he also had become

. also becoming

public speaker in his entire school.

During the field trip to the beach, my classmates

GOD

ignore the warning signs, climbing over the

NO CHANGE

the exposure to
were exposing themselves

. expose themselves

dunes and exposing themselves to the dangerous
4

polluted water.

The orchestra conductor can raise the volume by
lifting his arms up higher and lowering the
5

COM>

NO CHANGE

>

NO CHANGE

lower
lowered

. has lowered

volume by moving his hands closer together.

Ancient artifacts such as the Rosetta Stone should

Om

be in the hands of people who know how to

properly repair, while caring for and
permanently protecting them.
properly repairing, care for, and

properly repair, care for, and permanently

permanently protect them.

6

protect them.

. to properly repair care for, permanently
protecting them.

6

The doctor was a specialist in cardiovascular

GOD

surgery and had invented the cardiac stint.
7

© PrepPros 2025

NO CHANGE

NO CHANGE

the cardiac stint inventor.
the inventor of the cardiac stint.

. invented the cardiac stint.

- 74
-

PrepPros ACT English Course

COM>
COM>

According to most doctors, exercising the body is
8

just as important as exercise for the mind.

NO CHANGE

giving the body exercise
exercise for the body

. body exercise

I often still find myself struggling to properly
season beverages, as their flavor profile is much

NO CHANGE

than these.
then cooked dishes.

. than that of cooked dishes.

more nuanced than cooked dishes.
9

After traveling halfway around the world to Bali,

10.

Svetlana was disappointed that the swing at the

an exciting place to visit
a place to visit that was exciting

. excited to visit the place

rice fields was not as exciting a place to visit as
10

the pictures made it seem.

Lucky visitors to the arctic circle might see the

COM>

NO CHANGE

11.

aurora borealis in the sky, an arctic fox in the

COM>

NO CHANGE

beluga whales.
a beluga whale in the sea.

. aswimming beluga whale.

snow, or a beluga whale.
11

In his most recent public appearance, Dr.

12.

Rodriguez gave a speech about his

GOD

NO CHANGE

GOD

NO CHANGE

immunotherapy, and describes
immunotherapy and described

. immunotherapy, after which he described

autobiography, detailing his research in the field
of cancer immunotherapy and describing his
12

career achievements.

David relied on his own experience rather than

13.

13

on the meat thermometer to tell when the turkey
13

other than

. rather then on

was done.

The hunting habits of killer whales, which hunt

14.

together in pods of up to ten whales, are even

GOD

NO CHANGE

than the hunting habit’s of great
then great

. than those of great

more advanced than great white sharks
14

© PrepPros 2025

rather than

-75-

PrepPros ACT English Course

COM>

The goal of observing the dietary habits of the
Galapagos tortoises was not only to identify the

NO CHANGE

eat but also to examine
eat, and to examine

. eat but also examining

primary items the tortoises preferred to eat but it
15

was also to examine if there is any correlation
15

between food intake and behavior.

Many of the skills required for hockey - hand-eye

16.

coordination, strength, and agility - are similar to

COM>

NO CHANGE

basketball and lacrosse players
the games of basketball and lacrosse

. those for basketball and lacrosse

basketball and lacrosse.
16

By the end of the week, the team had purchased

17.

17

ten new computers that came with two-year

GOD

NO CHANGE

purchasing
will purchase

. purchased

protection plans to cover any accidental damage
and had ordered a new industrial printer capable
of printing 10,000 pages per day.

The table, which was built entirely out of

18.

redwood, provides a space for my father to
complete his puzzle and my hobby of building

me building model airplanes.
for me to build model airplanes.

. to allow me to build model airplanes.

18

model airplanes.
18

© PrepPros 2025

GOD

NO CHANGE

-76-

PrepPros ACT English Course

Chapter 8: Other Miscellaneous Topics
There are a variety of other miscellaneous topics that appear on the English Test. We will cover all of
these topics in this chapter.

Commonly Confused Words
The ACT will test you on many commonly confused words. The most common one of these on the

English Test is “affect” vs. “effect.”

Affect vs. Effect
“Affect” is a verb, meaning to act on or produce a change in. “Effect” is a noun, meaning the result
of a change. As long as you remember this rule, “affect” vs. “effect” questions should be easy!
Correct: Sunshine and palm trees affect my mood positively.
Correct: Sunshine and palms trees have a positive effect on my mood.
Many of the other most commonly confused words that appear on the ACT are below. There are many
more beyond the ones listed. If you ever see a word choice question and are unsure, just go with your
gut...most of the time you will be correct!
Advice - an opinion or
recommendation (noun)

Conscience - sense of right or wrong

Lie - to lie down

Conscious - awake

Lay - to place

Council - a group that advises

Lose - to misplace or not win

Counsel - to advice

Loose - to not be tight

Complement - something that

Indifferent - not caring

Advise - to recommend or give
information (verb)
Accept - to receive

Except - to take or leave out

completes
Allusion - an indirect reference
Illusion - a false perception of reality

Passed - to have moved beyond
Desert - dry, sandy region

Allowed - permitted to happen
Aloud - out loud

Not different - the same

Compliment - to praise
Past - gone by in time

Dessert - a sweet course at the end
of a meal

Precede - to come before
Proceed - to go forward

Ascent - climb

Dual - having two parts

Assent - agreement

Duel - a fight between 2 people

Assure - to remove doubt

Elicit - to draw or bring out

Ensure - to make certain a thing will

Illicit - illegal

Principle - arule
Principal - head of a school
Their - possessive pronoun

or won't happen
Insure - to get insurance

There - indicates location
Emit - to send out, to throw off

They’re - they are

Omit - to leave out
Beside — next to
Besides — in addition
Breath — inhalation/exhalation of air

Through - into or out of, continuing
Eminent - famous, respected

Threw - past tense of throw

Imminent - ready to take place

Thorough - careful or complete

Breathe - to inhale or exhale

Though - however
Farther - refers to physical distance

Cite - to quote or document

© PrepPros 2025

Thru - abbreviated form of through

Further - moreover

Sight - vision
Site - position or place

in time

Immanent - inherent or intrinsic

To - toward
Lead - a type of metal

Too — also

Led - past tense oflead

Two - 2

-77-

PrepPros ACT English Course

Than vs. Then
“Than” is only used for comparisons. “Then” has multiple meanings: it can be used when dealing with
time, to mean “in addition to,” or with “if/then” statements. When you see “then” and “than” on the test,
just remember use this quick rule: for a comparison, use “than.” Otherwise, use “then.”
Incorrect: I think that chocolate with almonds is much better then ice cream.
Correct: I think that chocolate with almonds is much better than ice cream.
Incorrect: I need to call my mother, and than we can leave.
Correct: I need to call my mother, and then we can leave.

Have vs. Of
Many people often mistakenly use “could of” or “would of.” This is always incorrect! To be correct, we
need to use “could have” or “would have.” The words “could,” “should,” “would,” and “might” should
always be followed by “have” not “of’. The reason we often make this mistake is the contraction
“could’ve,” which is short for “could have,” is often pronounced like “could of.”
Incorrect: If we left the show earlier, we could of avoided the traffic in the parking lot.
Correct: If we left the could earlier, we could have avoided the traffic in the parking lot.

Countable vs. Non-countable Adjectives
A countable noun is something that you can count, such as bottles of milk or hours. A noncountable
noun is something that cannot be expressed in a plural form, such as time or air. Certain adjectives,
shown in the table below, can only be used to modify countable or non-countable nouns.

Countable

Non-Countable

number

amount

many

much

fewer

less

few

little

Correct: The amount of time to make lunch depends on the number of ingredients in the dish.
Correct: I do not place much significance on how many trophies and athlete has won.
Correct: Skim milk has fewer calories than whole milk, so I drink less whole milk than skim milk.
Correct: I can spare only a little time for this. I need to leave in a few minutes.

© PrepPros 2025

