Chapter 13: Practice Passages
Now that you have learned everything you need to know about the ACT Reading Test, let’s put it all together
in full practice passages. The following 8 practice passages you on all the skills and question types we
have covered in this course.

As you work through these passages, keep these few tips in mind:
1.

Complete these passages 1 at a time and watch the video explanation right after you complete

each passage. Right after you complete the passage, you will remember exactly what you were
thinking as you answered each question. As you watch the video explanation, you can identify exactly
what you did correctly, where you made any mistakes in your thinking, and how you can improve on
the next passage. If you complete a bunch of passages in a row or watch the video explanation much
later, you will not learn as effectively.
Try different approaches to find the one that works for you. We discussed a variety of approaches
in Chapter 2 (now is a good time to review that chapter if you do not remember the details of the
different approaches!). If you are not sure what approach is best for you, try different approaches on
different passages. Once you find your favorite approach, stick with that approach for the rest of
your practice passages and practice ACTs to perfect that approach.

Do not worry about strictly timing the first 4 practice passages. You have 10 minutes per passage
(15 minutes with extended time), but you can take more time on these passages as you work on
applying all the skills we have learned. Your goal on these passages is to try your best to answer

all the questions correctly. Focus on applying what you have learned. If you need to take a bit
more time to do so at first, that 1s fine! Do not worry about the pacing yet. You will learn to work
more quickly as you improve your Reading skills.
Set a timer for the last 4 practice passages and work on your pacing skills. Try to apply the
pacing skills that we discussed in Chapter 2 and the time management tips from Chapter 3. Set a timer
according to the times below:
Regular Time = 10 minutes
Extended Time = 15 minutes

Do your best to complete the passage in time. If you do not finish in time, complete the rest of the
questions for practice and think about how you could have better managed your time. Make
notes of what you can do to improve on the next passage.
Learn from your mistakes. Review any topic(s) that you need to before going to the next

practice passage. Students who improve the most are the ones who are the most obsessive about
learning from their mistakes. After each passage, try to identify why you missed the questions

that you answered incorrectly. If there is any topic(s) from the course that you need to review, go
back and review before working on the next practice passage. For example, if you notice that you are
struggling on spotting the different question types, go back to Chapter 3. This course has covered tons
of information in a short period of time, so a quick review can be effective to help you continue to
improve.

Be patient! ACT Reading is a very difficult section for some students, and it 1s easy to get

discouraged if you are missing a lot of questions. Do your best and use the video explanations to learn
how to improve your skills. You will not immediately start answering all questions correctly. It isa
journey to get to the score you want. Your goal is to get a little bit better with each passage.

© PrepPros 2025

-9|-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

Individual Recorded Answer Explanations
For each practice passage, there are recorded answer explanations for every single question. After you
complete each practice passage, use the answer key in the back to check your answers. For any questions
that you answer incorrectly, found challenging, or were not confident you were approaching the

question in the best way possible, watch the video answer explanations. The explanations teach you how
to use all the skills that we have learned in the class. Even for questions you answer correctly, watching the
answer explanations can help you further improve your skills.

Full Passage Explanations Using Our 6 Approaches
Each passage also has a full passage explanation where you can watch me use the 6 approaches that we
discussed in Chapter 3. The full passage explanations will show you how to use the 6 approaches. You
should watch the full passage explanations for any approaches that you are trying to see how to best use
them. The full passage explanations help teach you critical skills such as answering questions out of
order, how to use the answer choices to your advantage, what to do when you cannot find the Waldo,
and much more.

The approaches used for the full passage explanation for each practice passage are listed below:
Passage #1: The Big Read with Elimination for Comparing Passages Questions (Dual Text Passage)
Passage #2: The Big Read with Notes

Passage #3: The Speed Reader
Passage #4: Label Then Read
Passage #5: Working Backwards
Passage #6: First and Last
Passage #7: Big Read with Notes and Traditional Comparing Passages Approach (Dual Text Passage)
Passage #8: Speed Reader

© PrepPros 2025

-92-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

Practice Passage #1
LITERARY NARRATIVE: Passage A is adapted from an essay

Passage B by Larry L. King
