Chapter 8: Correct vs. Incorrect Answer Choices — How to
Effectively Find the Correct Answer
One of the most important skills in the Reading Test is understanding what makes an answer choice correct or
incorrect. Many students struggle with this when first taking the Reading Test and feel like they are being
asked to somehow find what the ACT says is the “best” answer. This is not the case! There is always 1
correct and 3 incorrect answer choices. The challenge is knowing what makes the correct answer right and
the incorrect answer wrong. You should NOT approach the Reading Test by looking for the best answer.
Instead, we are looking for the 1 correct answer choice or why 3 answer choices are incorrect.
In this chapter, we will teach you how to breakdown each answer choice to identify the difference
between correct and incorrect answer choices.

The 5 Common Types of Incorrect Answer Choices
For success on the Reading Test, you must be able to explain what makes an answer choice incorrect.
Remember, for an answer choice to be correct, it must be supported by evidence in passage and answer

the question being asked. If you can understand not only what makes an answer choice correct but also what
makes the others incorrect, finding the correct answer choice becomes much easier.
The 5 most common types of incorrect answers on the ACT Reading Test are

1)

Not in the Passage

2)

Too Specific

3)

Too Broad

4)

Opposite or Slant of the Passage

5)

In the Passage but Not Answering the Question

In the rest of this chapter, we will go through these 5 types of incorrect answers and some example passages to
teach you how to properly think about the answer choices and more effectively find the correct answer.

© PrepPros 2025

-54-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

1) Not in the Passage
Many incorrect answer choices include information that is not in the passage. If the answer choice includes
details that are not in the passage, the answer is incorrect.

For example, let’s say there is a question about Adam’s clothing from the following passage:
Adam rolled up the tattered sleeves of his sweater, exposing the winding snake tattoos on both of
his forearms. He had gotten them after he returned from his first tour in Iraq — an homage to his fallen
comrades. Despite now living in upstate New York, he still wore his Army boots every day, the tops
of which were hidden below his faded black jeans, the only pair that he owns because, as he says,

“they’re the only ones that fit me just right.”
1.

Based on the passage, which of the following can be assumed about Adam’s clothing?

Gap,

He only wears the most comfortable clothing that he can buy.
The army provided him with free clothes after he returned home from Iraq.
His clothes are old and worn out.

He only owns one sweater.

Here, the only answer that has evidence we can point to in the passage is C. The “tattered sleeves” and “faded
black jeans” both demonstrate that his clothing is old and worn out. All other answer choices are not
supported by evidence from the passage. Could you picture Mr. Johnson’s jeans as the most comfortable that
he could afford? Could he have received free clothing from the Army? Could he own just one sweater? Sure,
all of these are possible, but we do not know any of this for sure from the passage. We cannot point to any
evidence in the passage that supports A, B, or D. We can only tell a story of why we think it could be true. As
we said in Chapter 1, there is no storytelling! If an answer choice is not clearly supported by evidence in the
passage, then it is always wrong! The answer is C.

© PrepPros 2025

-55-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

Passage 1

The best way to describe Ms. Upton is like a

1)

collared shirt that is buttoned all the way up. Sure,

Based on the passage, which of the following can
we infer about Ms. Upton?

that top button might bring about malaise, but it was
well worth it to upkeep her stellar reputation within

A.

Her coworkers hold her in the highest regard.

C.

The community regards her as the best

B.

the community and especially amongst her peers.
How else would everybody know that she is the

She is extremely well dressed.

businesswoman in the town.

best? The only problem was it was all a facade — a

D.

coy attempt to prove her superiority when in reality

She used to attend a book club.

she was just like the rest of us with our top buttons
10

undone. If only she would stop feigning
superiority, maybe we would invite her back to the
book club...maybe.

Passage 2

The term purebred was coined in 1890, but
2)

pure breeding got its start well before that when

Which of the following statements would the

author of the passage most likely support?

people decided to selectively breed dogs of a
certain pedigree to amplify specific traits.

A.

Breeders would selectively mate dogs of certain

produce dogs that are superior in certain ways

health, attributes, and sagacity to produce a new

but inferior in others.

“purer” breed. However, the centuries of closed
breeding have led purebred dogs to have many
of excellence and deleterious genes; this has

The origins of pure breeding began back in the

C.

Modern purebred dogs are far healthier and
have better attributes than their ancestors.

resulted in significant health problems for modern

D.

purebred dogs. As a result, many breeders are now

Cross breeding will successfully fix all of the
problems associated with purebred dogs.

beginning to create new “pure breeds” through
cross breeding (first generation crosses of two
purebred dogs).

© PrepPros 2025

B.

1800s.

problems, as selective breeding favors both genes
10

Pure breeding over a long period of time can

-56-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

2) Too Specific
Incorrect answer choices are very commonly too specific. Often, a single word or a short phrase in an answer
choice makes the entire answer choice incorrect. If the answer choice is too specific and goes beyond what
the passage says, it is always incorrect.
As you read each answer choice, look for specific details and strong statements that could make the

answer choice incorrect. Ask yourself, “Does the passage really say that?” Remember, the more specific and
stronger an answer choice is, the more likely it will be incorrect.
For example, let’s say you are reading a passage about pelicans’ fishing habits:
Pelicans fish by using their long beaks and large throat pouches to scoop up prey from the water’s
surface. Pelicans’ diets include fish, amphibians, small turtles, crabs, and even other small birds.
Most pelicans use a technique called “dive-bombing,” where the birds will tuck their wings and dive
directly into the water at unsuspecting fish. However, pelicans have also been known to hunt
cooperatively, especially when hunting near the shores. The groups of birds will form a line to drive
schools of smaller fish into the shallower waters, beating their wings near the surface, and then
scooping up their favorite prey.
1.

Which of the following statements can be inferred from the passage?

Gap,

Pelicans prey predominantly on fish during the summer months.

Great White pelicans are the only species of pelicans that hunt for turtles.
Small ocean fish are the main prey for pelicans.
Pelicans do the majority of their hunting in shallow waters near the coast.

Here A, B, and D are incorrect because they are too specific. For A, the passage does say that fish are the
predominant prey, but it did not at any point specify anything about summer months. For B, the passage never
discussed Great White pelicans. For D, the passage never details where the pelicans do the majority of their
hunting; it just mentions that pelicans hunt along the shallow waters near the shores. At the end of the passage,

“scooping up their favorite prey” refers to smaller fish as the favorite prey; therefore, the small ocean fish are
the main pray. The answer is C.

© PrepPros 2025

-57-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

On August 25, 1916, President Woodrow

The passage states that the National Park Service

Wilson signed the act creating the National Park

took what role from the Department of the

Service, a new federal bureau in the Department of

Interior in 1916?

the Interior responsible for protecting the 35
national parks and monuments then managed by

A.

and monuments and those yet to be

the department and those yet to be established.
This “Organic Act” states that “the Service thus

established shall promote and regulate the use of
the Federal areas known as national parks,
10

monuments, and reservations... by such means and

established.
B.

which purpose is to conserve the scenery and the

C.

established.
D.

such manner and by such means as will leave them
generations.”
An Executive Order in 1933 transferred 56
20

reservations.
According to the passage, what is one purpose of
the National Park Service?
A.

To conserve national parks and encourage an

national monuments and military sites from the

increase in the number of visitors to the

Forest Service and the War Department to the

parks.

National Park Service. This action was a major

B.

system of parks—a system that includes areas of

C.

historical as well as scenic and scientific
importance. Congress declared in the General

To create a safe haven for wildlife from
hunters and human development.

step in the development of today’s truly national
25

Identify and propose new lands to be

protected as national parks, monuments, or

and to provide for the enjoyment of the same in
unimpaired for the enjoyment of future

Management of 56 national monuments and
military sites and future sites yet to be

natural and historic objects and the wildlife therein
15

Overseeing only the 35 national parks and
monuments established by 1916.

measures as conform to the fundamental purpose
of the said parks, monuments, and reservations,

Protection of the current 35 national parks

To preserve lands in their natural form and
protect lands for future generations.

D.

Authorities Act of 1970 “that the National Park

To protect lands from the damaging practices
of logging and gold mining.

System, which began with the establishment of
30

Yellowstone National Park in 1872, has since

The list of locations in the National Park System

grown to include superlative natural, historic, and

in lines 35-37 serves to:

recreation areas in every region...and that it is the
purpose of this Act to include all such areas in the
System....”
The National Park System of the United States

A.

highlight that one goal of the National Park

B.

point out the locations Congress and the

System is to protect international lands.
President have decided are the most

now comprises more than 400 areas covering more
35

than 84 million acres in 50 states, the District of

Columbia, American Samoa, Guam, Puerto Rico,
Saipan, and the Virgin Islands. These areas are of

such national significance as to justify special

important to protect.

C.

similar systems in other countries.

D.

various acts of Congress.
Additions to the National Park System are
now generally made through acts of Congress, and
national parks can be created only through such

According to the passage, today’s system of
parks:

A.

protects areas that are historically, scenically,

B.

provides an example of a successful national

and scientifically important.

acts. But the President has authority, under
45

the Antiquities Act of 1906, to proclaim national
monuments on lands already under federal
jurisdiction.

show how widespread the lands preserved by
National Park System are today.

recognition and protection in accordance with
40

contrast the US National Park System with

parks system for other countries.
C.

is composed of lands across the country that
Presidents Wilson chose to conserve.

D.

fulfills Woodrow Wilson’s dream of

preserving nature in its original state for
future generations.

© PrepPros 2025

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

3) Too Broad
Sometimes, an answer choice is incorrect because it is too broad. This occurs when the answer choice does not
specifically answer the question being asked (more common) or does not match a more specific statement
made in the passage (less common). While broad answer choices are better in general, make sure that the
answer choice you pick is always specific enough to answer the exact question you are being asked.

For example, let’s consider this excerpt from a passage about Darwin’s finches and evolution.
Dr. Anders Robert became fascinated with evolution after reading Charles Darwin’s Theory of
Evolution in graduate school. But he was never fully satisfied with Darwin’s explanation of evolution

and his survival of the fittest model. Dr. Robert always felt there was another missing piece — a
something that he termed “micro-evolution,” evolution on a tiny scale that can occur over much
shorter time periods. While Darwin’s evolution occurs over many generations due to the pressures of
natural selection, Dr. Robert postulates that every 2 to 3 generations small changes occur to key
characteristics of a population and that over time enough of these small changes lead to new subSpecies and species forming in a shortened time frame. To test his theory, Dr, Robert will travel to the
Galapagos Islands to study changes in the beaks of some of the same species of finches that Darwin
studied over one hundred years ago.
1.

The main idea of the passage is to:

GaAWpY

research the theory of evolution using Darwin’s finches.
test a new idea about evolution by studying finches’ beaks.
highlight Dr. Robert’s lifelong fascination with evolution.

recreate Darwin’s research on the Galapagos Islands.

Here, A is incorrect because it is too broad. For A, does the passage discuss the theory of evolution? Yes, but
researching the theory of evolution is not the main idea of the passage, so A does not answer the question. C is
incorrect because it is too broad and includes a detail that is not supported by the passage. While the first
sentence directly states that Dr. Anders Robert is fascinated with evolution, his fascination is not the main idea
of the passage. Additionally, the passage never states he has a “lifelong fascination,” so C is incorrect. D is
incorrect because the word “recreate” does not match the passage, as there is nothing about Dr. Robert
recreating Darwin’s research. The main idea of the passage is about Dr. Robert’s research to test his new
theory, so B is the correct answer.

© PrepPros 2025

-59-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

The following passage is about honeybees in the United
States.

Honeybees are dying. Decimated by Colony
Collapse Disorder in the mid-2000s, bees remain
under assault from pesticides, climate change,
mites, and habitat destruction. Between 2014 and
2017, about a quarter of bees in the nation’s
commercial colonies died each winter, significantly
higher than the 15% previously considered normal.
This troubling trend, along with the importance of

honeybees to successful crop growth and overall
10

product yield, has led many farmers to rethink how
they will pollinate their crops.

Most people know that honeybees are important
for the pollination of flowers, and therefore

home for the next 10 days, until they are loaded

back onto the trucks in the middle of the night.
Since there is no other way to pollinate so many
flowers, farmers like Terrence will pay beekeepers

55 like Ellis over $5,000 each week for bees. In
addition to helping solve the pollination problem
farmers face due to the recent decline in bee
populations and ongoing issues with mass bee death
events in farmers’ hives, professional beekeepers
60 are also able to help maintain the food yield for

orchards of flowering trees and ensure a bountiful
harvest each year, all while making a good living
for themselves.
1.

essential in the farming of fruits and nuts that grow
15

A.

on flowering trees, but few know that honeybees
decrease in the honeybee population around the
world has created a huge demand for honeybees

B.

explain a largely unknown business.

C.

describe the difficulties that peach farmers
face today.

from farmers, who need the bees to pollinate their

D.

acres and acres of flowering trees. Without bees,

Terrence Jones, an organic Peach farmer in

2.

each of which can produce up to 1,000 flowers that

A.

The reason that honeybee populations have

B.

Professional beekeeping is a large and

C.

Honeybees can travel to multiple farms

been decreasing is still largely unknown.

need to be pollinated. To pollinate the 5 million
flowers on his farm, Terrence needs some serious

growing industry in the United States.

help. He has five hives of his own, but last winter
three of his five hives had mass bee deaths due to
30

Which of the following statements about

honeybees is best supported by the passage?

rural Georgia, has over five thousand Peach trees,
25

Varroa mites — one of the most common parasites

each year to pollinate the flowers of fruit

and a big problem for all beekeepers. The

trees.

D.

remaining bees are not nearly enough to get the
calls up his friend Ellis out in California.
Ellis is a professional beekeeper who keeps 500

beehives. Every year in the spring, Ellis packs up
his hives in specialty bee transport trucks and ships

them all over the country. Based on the size of
Terrence’s farm and the number of flowers that
40

need to be pollinated, Ellis is bringing ten hives to
Terrence’s farm. This will be these bees’ second

stop — they, along with 55 other hives, already
helped another farmer in Pennsylvania pollinate his
700 acres of early-blooming apple trees. After
45

arriving, the bees are carefully transported to the

peach fields in the middle of the night, when the
bees are all asleep in the hives. Shortly after
sunrise, there is an audible buzzing in the orchard,
where the bees are visiting thousands of blossoms
50

on the peach trees to harvest the nectar, pollinating
the flowers as they go. This will be the bees’ new

© PrepPros 2025

Honeybees are essential to produce all
types of fruits and nuts.

massive job done. So, what does Terrence do? He
35

explore the historical relationship between

bees and farming in the United States.

crops like apples, peaches, cranberries, and
almonds, just to mention a few, would fail.

describe one man’s quest to become a
professional beekeeper.

can be big business. The recent and alarming

20

The primary purpose of the passage is to:

3.

The first paragraph serves to:

A.

propose a solution to a challenge that is
introduced later in the passage.

B.

identify an issue that motivates the solution

C.

provide an example of a phenomena that is

discussed later in the passage.
explained later in the passage.
D.

explain the factors that led to a damaging

trend discussed in the rest of the passage.

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

4.

According to the passage, honeybees are

7.

essential for:
A.

about the location of Ellis’s beehives that are
not at Terrence’s farm?

vegetable farms that do not have any
beehives of their own.

B.

C.
D.

Based on the passage, what can be inferred

A.

any type of farm that does not have enough

The beehives are at other farms at
unspecified locations across the United

local bees to pollinate the flowers.

States.

farms that have decreased food yield due to

The beehives are at other peach farms in

pests and parasites.

Georgia.

fruits and nuts that grow on flowering trees.

The beehives are at the apple orchards in
Pennsylvania since apple trees take longer

5.

to pollinate.

The passage indicates that Ellis is bringing how

The location of the beehives is a secret that

many hives to Terrence’s farm?

Gap,
6.

Ellis refuses to share.

10

8.

55

500

The passages states that the pollination problem
farmers face is a result of:

The passage does not specify.

A.

declining bee populations and mass bee

death events in farmers’ hives.

It can most reasonably be inferred that the size

B.

Varroa mites and bacterial infections in the

of Terrence’s farm compared to the apple famer

farmers’ hives.

in Pennsylvania is:

bee’s having lowered pollination activity

A.

slightly larger.

B.

about the same size.

C.

slightly smaller.

D.

much smaller.

© PrepPros 2025

after being placed in a shipping container.
increased average daily temperatures due to
climate change.

-61-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

4) Opposite or Slant of the Passage
Many incorrect answers on the ACT are the opposite or a slant of what the passage states. These answer
choices often look correct because they include exact words or phrases from the passage; however, they

are incorrect because the answer choice is the opposite or a slant of what is in the passage. Remember,
you should not pick an answer choice just because you find a word or phrase that is directly in the passage, as
these are often incorrect answer choices. Always make sure the answer choice is 100% correct.
Let’s look at the passage about ocean currents below as an example:
Ice triggers the movement of ocean currents. As water freezes in the North and South Poles, the
water surrounding the ice becomes saltier and colder since the salt leaves the water upon freezing.
The newly formed ice then cools the surrounding water. The cold, salty water sinks due to its

increased density. Once it gets to the bottom of the ocean floor, the water must move somewhere — so
it travels southward to spread across the submerged surface of the earth. This is a cold current. Warm
water replaces it on the surface and moves to the north. This motion is known by scientists as the
global conveyor belt, a globe-wide current that circulates cold and warm water around the earth.
1.

Which of the following statements about the global conveyor belt is best supported by the
passage?

A.

Cold, salty water at the North and South Poles comes to the surface and replaces the water
that turned into ice.

B.

The ocean currents that make up the global conveyor belt change with the seasons.

C.

Melting ice at the North and South Poles is the first step in the chain reaction that causes
the ocean currents.

D.

Cold, salty water travels south on the ocean floor and warm water moves north on the
surface.

A is incorrect because the answer choice is opposite of the passage. A says that the cold, salty water comes to
the surface, but the passage says the cold, salty water sinks. B is incorrect because it is not in the passage;
there is nothing about the currents changing with the seasons. C is incorrect because the answer choice is
opposite of the passage. The first two sentences of the passage say that freezing water, not melting ice, is the
first step in the process that causes the oceans currents.
The correct answer here is D, as it is the only one that is supported by the passage. The passage states the
cold, salty water travels southward across the ocean floor and that warm water moves north on the surface.

© PrepPros 2025

-62-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

This passage is adapted from Ashley Yeager, “Slingshot

bundling it up in two front appendages called

Spiders Pull More Gs than Cheetahs Do.” © 2020 by The

pedipalps as it goes. On sensing the sounds of

Scientist.

prey nearby — most likely via its web, which
appears to act like a small antenna — the spider

Leg over leg, a furry brownish-black spider
tugs on a single silk thread, tightening the frame of

55

previously assumed it let go of the silk thread

its web. It pulls and pulls, as if removing slack
from a slingshot, and then it waits. Minutes pass,

altogether, Alexander and Bhamla’s videos show

sometimes hours. Then, when an unsuspecting

that the spider in fact only releases some of the line
while keeping hold of a part of it with its

insect flies by, the spider releases the thread,
springing itself and its satellite dish-shaped web

10

60

trap its next victim. Again and again, the spider

an eye, with the spider and its web hurtling

captures an insect, wraps it in silk for later, then

through the air at more than 4 meters per second (9

“comes right back to that tension line and bundles

g. That’s 130 times the acceleration experienced

it up again. That allows it to reset and reload
65

slingshot itself several times before the web is

that of a sprinting cheetah.

destroyed.
The speeds and accelerations of this spider are

Those eye-watering numbers led Georgia Tech

impressive, but so is the fact that, unlike most

chemical engineer Saad Bhamla to wonder: how
70

fast motions in biology,” he says, so when he

says. “Instead of waiting for something to collide

spotted one of these spiders flying past his face a

with it, the spider is going after things... actually
catching flying insects in midair.”

few years ago while he was hiking through the
Peruvian rainforest, he knew he had to investigate.

75

He checked the literature and found only a few
papers on Theridiosomatidae, the arachnid family

through the air to trap it is humbling,” says Sheila

comprising spider species that use their webs as

Patek, a biologist at Duke University who
studies tiny spring mechanisms across the natural

slingshots. The papers were decades old and only
80

enlisted the help of his postdoc, Symone

faster than their nervous systems can monitor, so

Alexander, and together they went out hunting for

they have to plan ahead and essentially let their
spring and latch system control what happens after

spiders in the Amazon rainforest.

After locating one of the spiders, which

85

“What’s fascinating is the amount of energy

researchers would set up portable high-speed

the spiders can store in their web and then unleash

cameras with magnifying lenses to zoom in on and

to catch their prey,” says Bhamla. Next, he wants

record their motions. Then, either Alexander or
Bhamla would snap their fingers to get the spider

90

thought to disperse energy, can, in fact, store

pair learn that a human finger-snap closely

energy, a characteristic that might inform the

matches the frequency of a buzzing mosquito —

design of synthetic silk. Now that high-speed

the spiders’ spring off. “It’s just amazing that we

camera footage can offer scientists a frame-by95

frame view of what the arachnids are doing, Patek

can snap our fingers and get this magical thing,”

says, “it just opens up a myriad of areas of

Bhamla says.

research in evolution, neuroscience, materials
science, and human engineering.”

Analyzing the footage, Alexander and Bhamla

could watch exactly how the spiders oriented
themselves on the tension line at the front of their
webs. Facing away from the web, the spider grips
its silk net with its four back legs and pulls itself
50

to investigate how the webbing material, typically

to catapult itself through the air. Only later did the

and that seemed to be the only frequency that set

45

they let go of the tension thread. “It’s superpowertype stuff,” Patek says.

measure roughly 2 millimeters in length, the

40

world. Spiders are using an external tool, a web,
to snare their prey, and they’re working at speeds

g-forces the spiders experienced. So Bhamla

35

“To see the video of this little spider pull on its
line, load its web, sense its prey, and then fly

described the slingshot motion, not the speeds or

30

web-building spiders, it’s actively hunting, Bhamla
says. “It’s changed the function of its web,” he

movements? Bhamla’s lab is “obsessed with ultra-

25

quickly,” Alexander says. The spider can usually

in freefall, and an order of magnitude greater than

the heck are these tiny spiders achieving such fast

20

pedipalps, making it easier to reset its slingshot to

toward its prey. All of this happens in the blink of

miles per hour) with accelerations exceeding 130

15

releases the tension line. Although researchers had

up the tension line with its four front legs,

© PrepPros 2025

- 63
-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

The passage can be best described as:
A.

5.

sense their prey by:

aseries of scientific experiments focusing
on a newly discovered species.

B.

A.

adescription of an observational study on
B.

touch, the spiders sense the prey as it

C.

vibration, the spiders can discern different

asummary of how a certain species of

contacts the web.

spider evolved to hunt in an unusual way.
D.

sight, the spiders see the prey with their
excellent eyesight.

a Species with a unique characteristic.
C.

The author suggests that spiders most likely

an overview of the differences between

types of prey based on frequency.
D.

slingshot spiders and web-building
spiders.

feel, the spiders use their web as a tool to

perceive the sound of prey nearby.

According to the passage, what led Bhamla to

The passage most strongly suggests that

first decide to study the Theridtosomatidae

Bhamla and Alexander were the first scientists

spiders?

to study the Theridiosomatidae spider’s:

A.

Bhamla wanted to discover a new species

A.

of spiders.

B.

slingshot motion.

B.

Bhamla sawa spider flying past him while

C.

webs.

in the rainforest in Peru.

D.

diet.

C.

Bhamla runs a lab that studies ultra-fast

D.

Bhamla wanted to understand how

motions in biology.

speeds.

The passage makes clear that snapping a finger
made the spiders jump because:

slingshot spiders store energy in their
webs.

A.

the visible movement of the finger triggers
their hunting instincts.

Based on the passage, what previously held

the spiders hear the snapping noise in the

C.

the pressure wave created by the snapping

same way they hear a flying insect.

assumption about Theridiosomatidae spiders
did Bhamla’s study disprove?

A.

B.

fingers releases the tension line.

The spiders completely release the tension

D.

fine after launching into the air.
B.

The spiders can use the web as a slingshot

C.

The spiders only hunt mosquitos.

D.

The spiders are unable to store any energy

frequency a mosquito.

several times in a row.

The description of the spiders having
“superpower-type stuff’ (lines 85-86) most
nearly refers to:

in their web.

A.
B.

cheetah in lines 12-14?

C.

Highlight the unconventional hunting

C.

spiders controlling their flight in the air
after letting go of the tension thread.

Emphasize the high speeds that spiders

D.

the slingshot spider’s nervous system

reach by comparing them to a more

operating faster than those of web-

commonly known animal.

building spiders.

Highlight the impressive accelerations the

spiders achieve by providing a reference
that readers are likely familiar with.
D.

spider webs both storing and dispersing
energy.

technique used by the spiders.
B.

spiders hunting at speeds faster than they
can perceive.

What is the purpose of the reference to the

A.

ahuman-finger snap closely matches the

Point out that spiders are more effective
hunters than other well-known predators.

© PrepPros 2025

- 64
-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

9.

Which of the following statements best

10. What is the main idea of the last paragraph
(lines 87-98)?

describes the process by which the
Theridiosomatidae spiders build tension in the

A.

line?

A.

B.

C.

spiders hunt require more analysis to fully

The spider faces the web, grabs the line

comprehended.

with its pedipalps, and pulls itself down

The slingshot spiders possess a unique

the line.

ability to use stored energy to hunt insects.

The spider wraps the line in its pedipalps,

A spider web’s ability to transfer energy

turns to face the web, and pulls itself up

may have applications to other areas of

the line.

science.

The spider faces away from the web, pulls

The slingshot spiders should be researched

itself up the line, and wraps the line up in

by scientists in a variety of fields.

its pedipalps.
D.

The methods with which the slingshot

The spider grabs the web with its four
back legs, pulls itself down the line, and
faces away from the web.

© PrepPros 2025

- 65
-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

5) In the Passage but Not Answering the Question
This final type of incorrect answer choice is often the most difficult to avoid. These are answer choices that

are directly stated in the passage but do not answer the question being asked. You will be able to go to the
passage, find the information, and match it with the answer choice. However, it will still be incorrect!
This is a good spot to reiterate two important tips we have learned already:
1.

Do not select an answer choice because it has a word or phrase that matches the passage. Make

sure the answer choice is 100% correct. The ACT will often put exact words or phrases from the
passage in incorrect answer choices to try to trick you.
2.

Finding evidence for an answer choice in the passage does not mean you found the correct

answer. You Still need to make sure you are answering the question the ACT is asking.

We will see some examples of these questions as we work through some full practice passages in chapter 13.

© PrepPros 2025

- 66 -

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

