ACT Notebook — Science Test

Introduction to Science Test
The Science Test consists of 40 questions that you will have 35 minutes to answer. There will be 6
passages, each followed by 5 to 7 questions. While it is called the Science Test, this section requires
very little actual science knowledge. A more accurate name for this test would be “The Analyzing
Charts and Graphs on Random Topics Quickly Test,” as the focus is on quickly analyzing charts and
graphs.
To do well on the Science Test, you do not need to be good a science class. If you love science class, it
can certainly help you, but it is far from a requirement to get a good score. For those of you who do not
love science class, do not worry. You can still get a great score on the Science Test with practice.

What is on each ACT Science Test?
The ACT Science Test always consists of:
e

5 Charts and Graphs passages test your ability to read charts and graphs and interpret
information given in tables, diagrams, and figures. For certain passages, you will also be asked
question about the experimental design. This is the most common type ofpassage on the ACT.

e

1 Conflicting viewpoints passage that asks you to understand, analyze, and compare different
hypotheses, opinions, or conclusions. This passage has much more text and sometimes has no
charts or graphs atall. The heading in the passage say “Student 1, Student 2” or “Scientist 1,
Scientist 2,” so the conflicting viewpoint passages are easy to spot.

Within the passages, you will see six types of questions.
e

Detail: These questions will ask you to locate a specific piece of data. To find the data point,
look directly at the graphs, charts, tables, or diagrams. On more difficult inference questions,
you may need to use multiple charts, graphs, tables, or figures at once you find the correct
answer. Be sure to pay attention to the axes to make sure you are finding the right detail.

e

Pattern: These questions ask you to spota trend on a graph, table, or chart (increase,
decreasing, etc.) or to use the pattern to identify where a data point would be.

e

Inference: These questions will ask you to make a conclusion based on the data provided.
Most commonly, you will need to use the data provided to draw a conclusion about a data point
or situation that is not directly shown in the charts and graphs.

e

Method: These questions test your understanding of experimental setup and scientific
methods and ask you to “think like a scientist.” You may need to think about how to gather
data, how to setup a control, or how experiments can be improved.

e

Scientific Knowledge: These questions require you to use some outside scientific knowledge.
The outside science knowledge most commonly comes from biology, chemistry, or physics and
is usually general knowledge students who have completes those classes are familiar with.
These are the least common type of question on the test and do not appear on every ACT.

e

Compare/Contrast: These questions are only in the conflicting viewpoints passage and ask
you to consider various aspects of opposing or alternative arguments.

© PrepPros 2021

-1-

ACT Notebook — Science Test

The most difficult part of the Science Test is that you have never worked on this in school, so there is a
learning curve. You have taken math courses, learned grammar rules, and done reading comprehension,
but I bet you have never met anyone who has taken a “reading charts and graphs” class. The Science
Test feels very uncomfortable to many students at first. The best way to conquer the ACT Science
Test is to understand the common types of questions, learn the proper approaches and strategies, and to
work through a bunch of practice ACTs. With practice, you will begin to feel much more
comfortable and confident on this section.

© PrepPros 2021

-2-

ACT Notebook — Science Test

