Chapter 1: How to Approach the Passages
At first glance, science passages often look intimidating. These is so much information and the random
topics of each passage, such as the migratory patterns of monarch butterflies or the crystallization
magma, are often unfamiliar to students. Students facing the ACT Science Test often ask the following
questions?

Charts & Graphs Strategies and Approach
Of the six passages on the Science Test, five of them will consist of mostly graphs, charts, tables, and
figures. The other one section will be the conflicting viewpoints passage. We will first discuss how to
approach the five non-conflicting viewpoint passages.
Most of the information in the charts and graphs passages is extra and unnecessary. The majority of the
questions can be answers by just using the charts and graphs and not using the text at all. Don’t spend
time trying to read and understand the entire passage...it’s not necessary and you will run out oftime!
Instead, spend around 30 seconds before starting on the questions. In these 30 seconds, focus on the
charts and graphs, paying special attention to the labels of the axes, what is being measured in each
chart, and where information is located. As for the text, just read the first sentence of the passage and of
the experiment(s) to just know the basics of what the passage is about. After these 30 seconds, you will
not fully understand the passage, but that is okay. You now know where the information is and can
proceed to the questions.
Within each passage, the questions go from easy to hard. The first two or three questions are generally
very straightforward, often just asking you to spota

trend or find a data point. As you continue to the

later questions in the passage, they can get more difficult by asking you to use experimental thinking,
use multiple charts or graphs, or consider a change to the experiment. Since each question is worth the
same amount, be sure to get the easy ones correct. If you cannot figure out one ofthe last two questions
in the passage, bubble in your best guess, circle the question, and move on. You can always come back to
it at the end if you still have time. It is better to take your best guess and keep moving onto the next
passage rather than spend a bunch of time on the most difficult questions and run out oftime at the end
of the section.
You want to find the easiest and faster way to get the correct answers. Remember to trust the questions.
Ifa question begins with “Based on Figure 2,” it means that the answer is in Figure 2. Go to Figure 2 and
find it! The ACT is not trying to trick you, so let the questions help guide you to the right part of the
passage. If the question does not direct you where to go, use the keywords in the question or answer
choices to help you. Finding the variables discussed or units of the answer choices can quickly direct
you to the right part of the passage. Throughout this process, remember that you do not need to
understand the experiment as a whole. As long as you can find the answer in the passage, just bubble it
in and move on.
If you read a question and you see a term or word that you do not know or cannot find in the charts or
graphs, it is time to go back to the text. As we have already said, most questions on the Science Test do
not require you to know the definitions of the variable. However, if you do need the definition, it will be
in italics, making it easy to scan the passage and find them quickly. Read the definition and then answer
the question.
Throughout the entire Science Test, itis very important to keep yourself moving. Time management is
crucial in this section, as itis often the hardest one for students to finish. You should be spending
between 5-6 minutes on each passage. If you find yourself spending more than 30 seconds ona

© PrepPros 2021

-3-

ACT Notebook — Science Test

problem, bubble in your best guess, circle the number, and move on. You can always come back if you
have time at the end.

Conflicting Viewpoints Strategies and Approach
At some point in the Science Test, you will find the one Conflicting Viewpoints passage. This passage
should be easy to spot by looking for headings like “Scientist 1,” “Scientist 2” or “Student 1,” “Student 2”.
This passage also generally has more text and sometimes have no charts or graphs atall. Itis important
to spot the passage quickly, as you must approach it differently than the other five passages.
Rather than skimming the passage, you must treat this more like a reading passage, reading and
annotating the entire thing. As you read, it is good to underline or write down the key differences
between the viewpoints. Having these notes will help you work more quickly on the questions rather
than having to re-read the text over and over again.
There are a variety ofstrategies for approaching this passage, but most students will save this passage
for last, as itis the most time consuming. Reading the text takes longer than skimming charts, graphs,
tables, and diagrams, and the Conflicting Viewpoints passage is often more difficult than others. If you
may run out oftime, itis best to run out of time on the most time-consuming passage.
Overall, the Science Testis a difficult passage and takes some practice to get comfortable with and see
improvements. Of course, it makes things even worse that it is the final section on the ACT. The best
way to improve is to practice! Get ready to work through lots of practice sections to get comfortable
with the pacing ofthe section and get accustomed to the types of questions. This section may never be
your favorite, but over time you will get much more “comfortable with being uncomfortable” and will be
able to succeed on the Science Test.

Other Tips
Tip #1 - Use the answer choices to help save time
On many questions, you will be able to use the answer choices to help you more quickly find the correct
answers. The answer choices in questions referring to charts and graphs will provide certain numbers,
units, or categories that can help limit down what part of the graph or chart you must use to find the
correct answer. Using the answer choices can also help you quickly eliminate incorrect answers that do
not match the information in the figure. For other types of questions, such as the scientific knowledge or
method questions, the answer choices will help you quickly realize which questions require you to go
back to the text for more information and which questions are just asking you to use your own
knowledge and experimental thinking. Some questions are just asking you to apply your own
knowledge, so you do not want to waste time going back to the passage if you do not need to. With
experience, you will be able to use the answer choices to help improve your time management on the
Science test.

Tip #2 - It’s okay to answer questions before understanding it all
One ofthe biggest challenges on the Science test is the amount of information that you are given in each
passage. Many passages are on random topics that you likely know little to nothing about. Are you an
expert on the growth rates of peat moss? I don’t think so! Your only job in this section is to answer
questions correctly, not be an expert on the experiment. Asa

result, you will often begin answering

questions before you really understand what is going on in an experiment. There is nothing wrong with
feeling a bit lost at times in this section. It actually means that you are managing your time well. Even

© PrepPros 2021

-4-

ACT Notebook — Science Test

the most skilled students will sometimes feel a bit lost in this section, but that is just part of the
challenge. Remember, all you need to do is find the correct answers, not actually be able to explain the
entire experiment.

© PrepPros 2021

-5-

