Chapter 10: Redundancy, Wordiness, and Irrelevance
On the English Test, wordiness, redundancy, and irrelevance are common errors. Anytime we see
redundancy, wordiness, or irrelevant information in an answer choice, it is always incorrect; the
shortest and simplest answer choice is almost always correct. The goal is for the sentence to
express the same information in the shortest grammatically correct way. If anything is wordy,
redundant, or irrelevant, get rid of it.

Redundancy
The most common mistake on these types of questions is redundancy. To check for redundancy, read
the sentence itself and the sentence(s) before to check for any repeated information.
Incorrect: After two years of traveling, Jerome finally returned back home.
Correct: After two years of traveling, Jerome finally returned home.

By definition, if Jerome is returning, he is coming back. Therefore, we do not need the word “back” in
the sentence.
Incorrect: In Sweden, there are about 300,000 to 400,000 moose, many of which stand over seven
feet tall, roaming freely in the Swedish forests.
Correct: In Sweden, there are about 300,000 to 400,000 moose, many of which stand over 7 feet
tall, roaming freely in the forests.

The sentence already specifies the moose are in Sweden, so saying “Swedish” is redundant.

Wordiness
Sentences can also be unnecessarily wordy without redundancy. For these questions, pick the answer
choice that uses the fewest words to express the same idea.
Incorrect: The ancient Italian sculptures were donated to a cultural institution supporting
intellectual endeavors related to renaissance art.
Correct: The ancient Italian sculptures were donated to a museum devoted to renaissance art.

Irrelevance
Incorrect answer choices may include information that is irrelevant to what is being discussed in the
passage. Irrelevant information most often appears as a long and wordy answer choice and is
always incorrect.
Incorrect: To win the game, Ricky needed to make both free throws. Players are not allowed to step
in the lane during a free throw attempt. He made the first one. The entire gym was quiet
as he stepped to the line for the second.
Correct: To win the game, Ricky needed to make both free throws. He made the first one. The
entire gym was quiet as he stepped to the line for the second.

© PrepPros 2025

-90 -

PrepPros ACT English Course

TIP - How to Spot Redundancy, Wordiness, and Irrelevance Questions
The ACT now directly tell you if a question is testing you on redundancy, wordiness, or
irrelevance. Redundancy, wordiness, and irrelevance questions will ask you one of the following
questions:

1.

Which choice is the least redundant in context?

2.

Which choice best avoids wordiness and redundancy in context?

On the ACT, redundancy, wordiness, and irrelevance questions look like this:
1.

The July 4th “Walk for Wags” event, a

Which choice is the least redundant
in context?

fundraising event for local dog shelters,

raised over $10,000 this year.

A.

NO CHANGE

B.

this year for local dog shelters.

C.

in July of this year.

D.

for local dog shelters.

In the example above, the answer is A. The sentence already said the event is for local dog shelters, so B
and D are incorrect. The sentence also already states the event is in July, so Cis incorrect. As we said at
the beginning of this chapter, always pick the shortest and simplest answers choice, as the shortest
answer choice is always correct for these types of questions.

TIP - Never Use The “Short Answer Is Correct” Trick on Grammar Questions
When you are working on grammar questions, do not always pick the shortest answer! On grammar
questions, there are times when the shortest answer is incorrect. Make sure that you are applying the
grammar rules. Remember,

you are only being tested on redundancy when the ACT directly asks you to

pick the least redundant answer choice.
One example of when the shortest answer is not correct is below:
1.

The answer choice is an ambiguous pronoun. If the answer is so short that we do not know
exactly who or what it is referring to, it is incorrect! Keep an eye out for these words: they,
them, it, this, that, these, those, some, none.
1.

Which choice makes the sentence most

Freddie became so fascinated with coral

grammatically acceptable?

after watching the documentary about

A,

NO CHANGE

B.

some of them to after finished the

growing coral colonies in home aquariums
that he ordered some.

documentary.
C.

afew to his home.

D.

some coral colonies.

In this example, “some” is an ambiguous pronoun and is incorrect. “Some” could be referring to the coral
colonies or the aquariums. The only answer that specifies what Freddie is ordering is D. The question
asks which choice is grammatically acceptable, so this is not a redundancy/conciseness questions.

© PrepPros 2025

-91 -

PrepPros ACT English Course

Chapter 10 Practice:
With steep hills and a rocky terrain, the hike up

>UAW

the mountain was a slow and laborious one.

NO CHANGE

the climb
the slow and steep climb

. the steep climb up rocky terrain

However, the reward at the end of the slow climb
1

was a fantastic view!

The recording of the robbery suspect’s phone call

SUAW
OS

made him seem guilty to the crime of robbery.
2

NO CHANGE

to be the guilty of robbery.
to appear to be guilty.

. guilty.

To decorate the wall of the classroom, the entire
fifth grade class had completed an artistic
3

NO CHANGE
one

a mural

. a painting on the wall

rendering of paints across the wall that depicts a
3

sunrise.

SGUA

The puppies, after having been born just two
4

weeks ago, were now up for adoption.

NO CHANGE

born
which were born

. after their mother gave birth to them

The city of Atlantis lives in legend. Over the
years, Professor Lusk and his team have
repeatedly tried to locate it but still have not

SUAW

NO CHANGE

>UAW

NO CHANGE

in an effort to find the location of
attempts to locate

. over and over again to locate

been able to find any true evidence of its
existence.

Today, there over one thousand professional
Roman sculptors that live in the city of Rome and
6

currently
today in Rome

. DELETE the underlined portion.

make a living selling original work or
refurbishing antique sculptures.

SGUO

The can of paint, using the fire’s heat to heat the
7

can, exploded and shot into the yard.

NO CHANGE

heated by the fire
heated by the fire and that warmth

. heated by the fire that was burning

© PrepPros 2025

-92
-

PrepPros ACT English Course

voOW>

in June the bonsai trees

D>VOW

granite

D>VOW

the recently completed

. NO CHANGE

If you want to see James’s incredible bonsai trees
and many other miniature plants, you can see

some

. each year they

them at the annual bonsai competition at the
Chicago Botanical Garden, where some of his
8

bonsai trees are on display for all of June.

. NO CHANGE

The hidden entrance was belowa black granite

. black granite

archway and hidden by a bunch of thick ivy. The

. DELETE the underlined portion

best way to spot the entrance is to look for a
three missing blocks above the black archway.
9

Shortly after its completion in 1999, around that

10.

10

. NO CHANGE

. and already a famous landmark,

time, the Staples Center was one of the most
10

. DELETE the underlined portion.

famous landmarks in Los Angeles.

11.

. NO CHANGE

. atrace element that is easily identified

The analysis is possible because the mixture

since it is magnetic.

contains magnetic cobalt, a trace element that is

an easily identifiable, trace element that

11

makes the analysis possible.

easily identified.

. atrace element that is easily identified

11

without difficulty.

12.

On the bottom shelf is a bin filled with dog food.
Each month, Alicia goes to Alfred’s Pet Shop, buys

bin.
bin with special weight loss food.

. bin monthly.

a bag of special weight loss food for her husky,
and refills the bin on the bottom shelf.

The rubber band actually has many more creative

13.

. NO CHANGE

>VOW

. there are over fifty

uses than simply holding together papers. Of the

many of which are very creative

. DELETE the underlined portion

numerous rubber band uses, of which there are
13

many, some include a hair tie, a pencil grip, and
13

an eraser.

© PrepPros 2025

>VOW

. NO CHANGE

-93
-

PrepPros ACT English Course

Chapter 11: Word Choice
Word choice questions on the ACT ask you to select which word is correct. For these questions, read
the sentence and sentence(s) before and after for context to tell which word is correct.
Some word choice questions may test your knowledge of the definitions of words as well. Ifa question
is testing your vocabulary, do not assume the hardest vocabulary word is correct. Sometimes, the
ACT puts challenging words on the test that you need to know and other times the challenging words
are incorrect answers. On test day, do the best you can with the words that you know. If you know
that a word works, pick that word no matter how easy or hard the word seems. If you do not know a
word and have to guess, take your best guess and move on.
Word choice questions will always have 4 words with no punctuation or the same punctuation and will

ask you, “which choice is clearest and most precise in context?” An example is below:

Adding solar panels to your house can

1.

;
;
;
emit huge savings on energy bills each

Which choice is the clearest and most
precise in context?
A. NO CHANGE

month.

B. claim
C. gift

D. result in
The best way to answer these questions is to read for context, plug each word into the sentence, and

pick the one that makes the most sense in the context. Here, the correct answer is “D” since “result in” is
the only answer choice that works in the context of the sentence.
Chapter 11 Practice:

After reading my paper, my teacher was

1.

A. NO CHANGE
B. ecstatic

adamant that I needed to learn how to properly

C. eminent

cite my sources.

D. trivial

WhenI first moved in, the passing train woke me

2. A. NO CHANGE

up every night. However, I can now just tune it

C. snub it

out and sleep through the entire night.

B. scorn it

2

With the new air travel restriction, the TSA is
