Chapter 14: Adding or Deleting Information
Adding or deleting information questions ask you to consider whether information should be included
in the passage or not. For these questions, you must read for context. We recommend reading the
entire paragraph in which the question is located. Depending on the question, you may need to read
more than that, so use your best judgment.
To best answer these questions, read the paragraph twice: once with the information included and
once with the information deleted. Reading the paragraph both with and without the information in
the question should make it clear whether the information should be included or deleted.

Adding Information
The first type of adding information question gives you a sentence or portion of a sentence and asks you
if the information should or should not be added. The answer choices will always have two parts: (1)

should the information be added, “yes” or “no,” and (2) a justification of why the information should or
should not be added.
When looking at the second part of the answer choices, make sure that you are only considering the
sentence or portion of a sentence that is or is not being added. Many students pick a justification
that goes far beyond what the sentence or portion of the sentence says or include details that have
nothing to do with the sentence itself.

Dr. Paul’s career began in 1965 when he

1.

enrolled at Georgetown’s Medical School. He

At this point, the writer is considering adding

the following true statement:

graduated at the top of his class and got hired as

As a young man, Noah Anderson attended
Yale University, where he played baseball

a surgeon at the Houston Medical Center. He

and studied biology, and then enrolled at
Stanford’s Medical School.

decided to specialize in heart surgery, quickly
becoming known as one of the top young
surgeons in Texas.

Should the write make this addition here?
A. Yes, because it establishes the qualifications
of Dr. Paulus’ mentor.

Prior to accepting his promotion to head
heart surgeon, Dr. Paul had spent the last eight

years training under Dr. Noah Anderson, one of
.
ae
the best cardiologists in the U.S.

1

.
During

what could be best summarized as an

B. Yes, because it indicates that Dr. Noah

Neoerson had ‘ top-notch education. h

C. No, because it does not also indicate where
Dr. Paul studied.

D. No, because the information is not relevant

apprenticeship, Dr. Paul assisted in over 1,800

to the passage’s discussion of Dr. Paul’s

assorted cardiac surgeries, perfecting his ability

career.

to conduct open-heart surgery.
For this question, the correct answer is D. The sentence is not relevant to the passage’s focus, which is
on Dr. Paul’s career.

© PrepPros 2025

- 109 -

PrepPros ACT English Course

The second type of adding information question will underline a portion of the sentence and ask if you
should make a revision.

After months of remote learning, a handful of

2.

students are finding a sliver of normal school

At this point, the writer is considering

revising the underlined portion to the
following:

life through learning pods. The students

English learners, who require support in

identified for learning pods include some of

two languages, are a second group.

the most vulnerable. One such group is special

education students who need in-person

Should the write make this revision?

services and may not tolerate long hours on

A. Yes, because it provides examples of who

the computer. English learners are a second

the English learners are.
B. Yes, because it clarifies who the English

group. Others eligible for the pods lacka

learners are.
C. No, because it distracts from the

sustainable study environment at home or face

emotional issues worsened by the pandemic.

paragraph’s discussion of learning pods.
D. No, because it does not specify where the

While most students will continue to study

English learners will study.

online, some small groups will begin returning
to campus as soon as next week.

For this question, the answer is B. The term “English learners” is not specifically defined and likely one
the reader is not familiar with. The revised version clarified what the term “English learners” means, so
the revision should be made.

Deleting Information
The first type of deleting information question is just like the first type of adding information question
with one obvious difference: the question will ask if the underlined portion of the sentence should or
should not deleted. The approach for these questions is identical to the approach for the adding
information questions we just covered at the start of this chapter, so we will not repeat it again
here.

Jerry and Eric have joined a growing number

ee

;

;

;

of mountain bikers in California who prefer
extreme downhill mountain biking.”

Rather

The writer is considering deleting the underlined

portion. Should the underlined portion be kept
or deleted?
A. Kept, because it highlights how dangerous

than following the established trails, they
journey to the tops of mountains in central

California and find their own trails to ride. “It
is just us, the bikes, and the great outdoors.

mountain biking is.
B. Kept, because it details where Jerry and Eric
go for the extreme downhill mountain biking.

C. Deleted, because it is not important where
Jerry and Eric go mountain biking.
D. Deleted, because it distracts from the main

We have to find out own path down, and I love

point of the paragraph.

that added level of adventure,” says Eric.

The correct answer here is B. The phrase “the tops of the mountains in” provides a relevant detail about
where the “extreme downhill mountain biking” takes place and also help explain why it is called
“extreme downhill mountain biking.”

© PrepPros 2025

-110-

PrepPros ACT English Course

The second type of deleting information question asks you to identify what the passage would lose if a
certain word, phrase, or sentence were deleted. For these questions, it is all about the context! A good

trick here is to try “deleting” the word, phrase, or sentence: read the paragraph with the word,
phrase, or sentence and without it. Then, ask yourself what the passage loses when the information is
deleted.

Some popular ecotourism destinations have

been burdened by the presence of travelers.
It’s not uncommon for overeager tourists to

wander off the designated paths and leave
trash behind. Certain destinations like the

If the writer were to delete the preceding

sentence, the paragraph would primarily lose:

A. reasons why there has not been much
tourism in certain areas.

B. examples of ways that ecotourism has helped
the local economy.
C. an example of steps that ecotourism

Galapagos Islands have begun to combat this
problem by limiting the number of visitors.

destinations have taken to minimize the
impact of tourists.
D. reasons that tourists travel to remote
locations.

The correct answer here is C.

The final sentence in this paragraph gives a specific example a how some

of the ecotourist destinations have tried to control the damage done by travelers.

TIP - Read for context (as much as you need)
The most common mistake on adding and deleting information questions is to rush and not read
enough. For any question that asks you about adding or deleting information, make sure to read for
content both before and after. This means reading at least the preceding sentence and the following
sentence. At times, you may need to read the entire paragraph to get the context that you need. Take
your time...these questions are not particularly difficult as long as you read the paragraph and
questions carefully!

© PrepPros 2025

-111-

PrepPros ACT English Course

TIP - DELETE the underlined portion.
Some questions will have “DELETE the underlined portion” as answer choice D or J. Whenever you
see this answer choice, pay extra close attention to what the question is asking you to do: these
questions can be testing grammar (most commonly sentence structure), redundancy,
irrelevance, and transitions. On the new Enhanced ACT, the question will tell you what the question
is testing you on!

When you see these questions, you should follow these steps:
1.

Read the question carefully to identify which type of question you are looking at. The
question will make it clear if you are being tested on grammar, redundancy, or transitions.

2.

For grammar questions, read the entire sentence as it is written and with the
underlined portion deleted. See if the current sentence or deleting the underlined portion
creates a sentence fragment, run-on sentence, or any other sentence structure error.

3.

For redundancy and transitions questions, read the previous sentence(s). For
redundancy, look to see if any of the answer choices are redundant with information in the
sentence itself or the previous sentence(s). For transitions, read for context to see if the
transition is necessary.

These questions can appear like the examples below:
Even though the door was locked, the

1.

Which choice is the least redundant in context?

weary traveler tried repeatedly to open

A.

it. He swiped his key card over and over

B. multiple times
C.
D.

before giving up and sleeping on the front

NO CHANGE
hoping the door would open
DELETE the underlined portion

porch.

The first sentence already says the traveler “tried repeatedly to open” the door, so the correct answer
is D.

The masked bandit hoppedthe fence and

2.

Which transition word, if any, is the most
logical in context?

disappeared into the night. For example,
he had successfully evaded all four of

police officers that had been chasing him.

A.

NO CHANGE

B.

Similarly,

C.

In summary,

D.

DELETE the underlined portion

For transitions questions with the option to delete the transition, the transition word or words are
almost always unnecessary, as in this example. The answer is D.
3.

Nitrogen gas, which is a key nutrient for

Which choice make the sentence most
grammatically acceptable?

plants, constitutes 78 percent of the Earth’s
;

;

,

air, however plants cannot use nitrogen in

A.

the gas form.

NO CHANGE

B.

but

C.

therefore

D.

DELETE the underlined portion

This example may look like another transition question, but it is actually testing sentence structure.
The answer is B because we need a comma + FANBOYS to link two independent clauses. A and C are
incorrect because they a not FANBOYS, and deleting the underlined portion creates a comma splice.

© PrepPros 2025

-112-

PrepPros ACT English Course

Chapter 14 Practice:
1.

In my opinion, there is nothing worse than being

The writer is considering deleting the
underlined portion. Should the underlined

stuck on an airplane. People are far too close to

portion be kept or deleted?

you, the food is terrible, and somebody is always

A. Kept, because it provides an example of
how air travel can sometime be

sick. In Chicago, I was once stuck on a runway

imperfect.

1

for three hours before the plane took off.

B. Kept, because it emphasizes how bad air

1

travel is.

The alternative is not much more appealing: a

C. Deleted, because it makes the narrator
seem biased.

long ride in the car - and very likely stuck in

D. Deleted, because it distracts from the

traffic. The food is better, but only marginally,

writer’s main point.

since all of the food right near the highway is
greasy fast food. At least when driving, I know

2.

The author is considering revising the
underlined portion to the following:

there will be no stranger in my car coughing all

much longer and only slightly less
over me.

cramped
A. Yes, because it offers a clearer
comparison between driving to flying.
B. Yes, because it adds information about
how much longer driving is.
C. No, because it suggests that driving and
flying are both undesirable.
D. No, because it adds information that is
irrelevant at this point in the passage.
3.

Some artists are so famous that tickets to their

At this point, the writer is considering adding

in the phrase “in Los Angeles’s football
stadium” here. Should the writer make the

shows are almost impossible to get no matter

addition or not?

where they perform. Would you believe that last

year’s Beyoncé concert

A. Yes, because it provides a detail showing

sold out in less than

impressive the sell-out was.
B. Yes, because it shows the location where

one minute? The fact that so many tickets were

the concert will be.

purchased that quickly boggles the mind.

C. No, because it does not matter where the
concert is.

D. No, because it makes it sound like Beyoncé
does not perform outside of the US.

. NO CHANGE

gOWD

My friend Edward insists that man-buns and
long beards are not just a trend. Likewise, I like

On the other hand,

. DELETE the underlined portion

4

to remind him that mullets and rat tails were
also once cool back in the 1980s.

© PrepPros 2025

Similarly,

-113-

PrepPros ACT English Course

5.

Bottled water has become increasingly popular

The writer is considering revising the
underlined portion to the following:

over the last ten years. Most water companies

such as fresh glacial water or alkaline

claim to have some special source for the water,

spring water.

many from exotic locations. But is bottled water

Should the writer make this revision?

really better? Studies have shown that the

A. Yes, because it provides a better
indication of the sources of the water.

majority of bottled water is just filtered and

B. Yes, because it clearly identifies why the
water is better from these sources.

bottled tap water. “Scientifically speaking, there

C. No, because it adds information that is

is no notable difference between bottled water

irrelevant to the passage’s discussion of
bottled water.

and filtered tap water; it is just a matter of

D. No, because it suggests that bottled water

personal preference,” says Dr. Rebecca Zeratsky.

must be alkaline.

Bottled water is filtered before it is bottled. If

6.

Ifthe writer were to delete the underlined

you filter water at home, the water itself is

portion, the essay would primarily lose a:

essentially the samee

A. statement revealing the narrator’s belief
that filtered water is better than bottled
water.

B. claim arguing the reason why bottle
water is filtered.
C. detail supporting the writer’s argument
about the similarities of bottled and
filtered water.
D. comment suggesting that the narrator
questions the quality of bottled water.

7.

Ifthe writer deleted the words “aqua” and
“white and black,” the sentence would

After waiting for four months, Sandra finally got

primarily lose information that:

her new iPhone. To protect it, she bought an

A. provides details indicating what the

aqua phone case with a black and white picture

phone case looks like.
B. indicates the options for different phone

of a sea turtle.

case colors.
C. emphasizes Sandra’s favorite colors.
D. details how patient Sandra has been.

Charles has a serious obsession with mountain
8.

climbing. When he is home, Charles drives two

underlined portion. Should the underlined

hours to the mountains each weekend to go

portion be kept or deleted?

climbing. But even that cannot satisfy him!

A. Kept, because it highlights how much
Charles enjoys mountain climbing.

During vacation last year, he insisted on

B. Kept, because it clarifies why Charles

8

went mountain climbing.

climbing the highest mountain in Croatia even
though the temperature was over 100 degrees. |

C. Deleted, because it provides details that
are irrelevant at this point in the passage.
D. Deleted, because it distracts from the

would never do such a thing.

© PrepPros 2025

The writer is considering deleting the

main idea of the paragraph.

-114-

PrepPros ACT English Course

9.

After stepping off the plane, John and his fellow

At this point, the writer is considering adding
the following sentence.

instructor Jameis began to get acquainted with
both the sled drivers and their dogs. They were

After winning the race, John went on to

here to help two teams optimize everything from

become a well-known dog trainer and

the nutrition of the dogs and drivers to the order

even starred in a dog training show ona

of the dogs and when to take breaks. The dogs

major network.

and drivers were preparing for the Iditarod, a

Should the writer make this revision?

1000-mile race from Alaska to Nome. John won

A. Yes, because it reinforces the paragraph’s

the event years earlier thanks in large part to

claim that John was skilled at working

paying attention to details that many of his

with dogs.

competitors hadn’t even thought of. Some of his

B. Yes, because it provides context for how

most innovative techniques included creating his

the two teams knew about John and hired

own food for his dogs and using monitors on the
dogs to manage fatigue.

him.

After retiring from

C. No, because it interrupts the paragraph’s

racing, John missed the intensity of the race, so

discussion of how John was training the
dogs.

he decided to become an Iditarod consultant.

D. No, because it does not give background

After some brief introductions, the first thing he

information on Jameis.

did was start running the dogs through tests
while Jameis began working with the sled drivers
on racing strategies, techniques, and tips.
To be selected as one of the three black students
to integrate West Virginia’s graduate schools

10. At this point, the writer is considering adding

would be a notable life achievement for most

the following sentence.

people. However, for Katherine Johnson, it was

John Glenn asked for Johnson to run the

only the beginning of her shattering norms and

calculations by hand to double check

helping to change American history. Johnson

them, and if she cleared them, he was

went on to amaze her professors with her

good to go.

mathematical prowess. After raising her

Should the writer make this revision?

children, Johnson got a job analyzing data from
test flights at NASA, but her biggest achievement

A.

claim about how impactful Katherine

came after the Soviet Union lunched the Sputnik

Johnson was to American history.

satellite. The United States needed to have a

B.

grand success of their own and decided to puta
the team that created the calculations that

member of the team.
C.

allowed John Glenn to step onto the moon. This

No, because it interrupts the paragraph’s
discussion about putting a man on the

was the first time that complex calculations and

moon.

computers were used for space flight. Many of

D.

the astronauts, including John Glenn, were

No, because it is not focused on the
achievements of Katherine Johnson.

incredibly nervous about putting their lives into
the hands of machines, which back then were
The flight

ultimately was a success and Johnson went on to
be a key member of many other projects at NASA
and eventually was awarded the Presidential
Medal of Freedom.

© PrepPros 2025

Yes, because it shows that Katherine
Johnson was the only competent

man on the moon. Johnson was a key member of

prone to many bugs and hiccups.

Yes, because it reinforces the paragraph’s

-115-

PrepPros ACT English Course

Chapter 15: Logical Placement
