Chapter 4: Verbs
Verbs questions test you on two major topics - subject-verb agreement and verb tense. The subject-

verb agreement questions are trickier, as at times it can be difficult to find the subject and “hear” which
verb is correct. You will learn a few methods in this chapter to correctly answer these questions. For
the verb tense questions, the approach is much more straightforward: read for context and go with the
answer that sounds correct.

Subject-Verb Agreement
Whenever you see a verbs question on the ACT, your first job is to find the subject. The subject, which
is the person, place, or thing doing the action, is usually at the beginning of the sentence.
The subject of the sentence must agree with the verb. If the subject is singular, the verb must be
singular, and if the subject is plural, the verb must be plural. In simple sentences when the subject and
verbs are right next to each other, it will be easy to select the right verb:
Cats (loves/love) to sit in empty boxes.
My dog (barks/bark) at the mailman every day.
Easy right? Unfortunately, verbs questions will not be this easy on test day. The ACT increases the
difficulty by putting distance between the subject and the verb. The farther away the subject is from the
verb, the more likely we are to say the verb incorrectly. Remember, what sounds right is not always
right. You cannot trust your ear on subject-verb agreement questions.
There are 3 ways the ACT will try to trick you on subject-verb agreement:
1.

Unnecessary information phrases between the subject and verb.

Unnecessary information phrases never contain the subject. Cross out any unnecessary
information phrases to find the subject.
Tortoises, known to live to over 150 years old, (is/are) sold at the local pet shop.
The committee, composed of two former CEOs, one politician, three lawyers, and two doctors,
(vote/votes) to delay the release of the new product until next quarter.
2.

Prepositional phrases between the subject and verb (most common).

Prepositional phrases never contain the subject or the verb. Cross out prepositional phrases to
find the subject.
The entire group of students (is/are) organizing a bake sale to raise money.
The pod of dolphins (hunts/hunt) as a team.
3.

Group nouns that sound plural but are singular.

Group nouns (class, committee, team) are singular even though the group consists of more than one
person/thing.
The sheep herd (waits/wait) to be sheared.
The jury (agrees/agree) that the defendant deserves to be put in jail.

© PrepPros 2025

- 44 -

PrepPros ACT English Course

TIP - Read the Subject and Verbs Side-by-side
Once you find the subject and verb, read them next to each other and ignore the information in between.
This will help you more easily identify which one is correct.
A large percentage of the voters, many of whom are under the age of 30, (prefer/prefers) the new
housing proposal.
Cross out any unnecessary information and prepositional phrases.
A large percentage efthe voters, manyehyhem
are under the age of 30, (prefer/prefers) the new
housing proposal.

The subject is “percentage.” Put the subject and verb next to each other and ignore the rest of the
sentence.

Correct: A percentage prefers the new housing proposal.
Practice:

1. The entire class of first graders (cheer/cheers) when the ice cream truck arrives.
2. The proposal for planting a new grove of orange trees (requires/require) an approval of 80% to
pass.

3. With the budget finally approved, the new system for payroll, scheduling, and human resources that
took three years to build (is/are) finally going live next month.

TIP - Plug in “he/she/it” for singular subject and “they” for plural subjects
Sometimes it is difficult to “hear” which verb correctly matches with the subject. For singular words,
plug in “he,” “she,” or “it” for the subject. For plural words, plug in “they” for the subject. With this trick,
we will be able to easily hear which verb properly agrees with the subject.
The exact time for the meeting with the softball coach and location for the showcase
(has/have) not been finalized.
If we read the sentence as is, it is difficult to tell which verb fits. After crossing out the prepositional
phrases, the sentence looks like this:
The exact time forthe meeting seftball
with the
eeach and location fertheshewease
(has/have) not been finalized.

The subjects are “time” and “location,” so the subject is plural. Replace the subjects with “they.”
They (has/have) not been finalized.

Now it’s easy...we can tell that “have” is correct.

Try this tip with the examples below:
1.
2.

Each of the runners who complete the marathon (wins/win) a medal.
The complex designs and intricate needlework (makes/make) Julia’s carpets the most popular in
the entire art market.

© PrepPros 2025

- 45 -

PrepPros ACT English Course

Subject-Verb Agreement Practice:
1.

The stable hand hired by the farm owners (groom/grooms) the horses every morning.

2.

Both of the apartments (is/are) never vacant during the summer.

3.

Ned, the winner of the gold medal in the 200-meter breaststroke, and Claire, the bronze medal
winner in the 1000-meter freestyle, (was/were) featured on the cover of the swimming
magazine.

4.

Gold coins and silver bars, all once thought to be lost forever, (was/were) found in the sunken
pirate ship.

5.

Each of the girl scouts (sells/sell) delicious Thin Mint cookies.

6.

The cast of the award-winning show (takes/take) a bow after the show ends.

7.

Killer whales, which are the top predators in the ocean, (have/has) been documented hunting
great white sharks.

8.

The overall rating from the reviewers of the new restaurant, which is scored on categories
including the food quality and the ambiance, (is/are) worse than before the renovation and
reopening.

9.

To help raise money to save the farm, Janet donates her old clothes, Mike organizes a bake sale,
and Chloe and Bill (has/have) a yard sale.

10. One of the recipes for chocolate chip cookies in the cookbooks (call/calls) for brown sugar.
11. Flamingos, famous for their bright pink feathers, actually (get/gets) their color from a diet of
shrimp and algae.
12. The entire group of seagulls (is/are) following the child who keeps dropping french fries.
13. One of the symptoms (make/makes) Dr. Smith think that Andy just has the common cold.
14. Freediving, a very unique and uncommon sport, (require/requires) divers to hold their breath
for long periods of time.

© PrepPros 2025

- 46 -

PrepPros ACT English Course

Verb Tense
For questions on verb tense, trust your ear. As a native English speaker, you will know what sounds
right or wrong in the sentence as long as you read for context. To find which tense is correct, read
the previous sentence(s) and look for other verbs. Make sure to match the tense in the rest of the
paragraph.
On the ACT, do not pick a complicated tense (has run, had ran, had been running, would have run, etc.)
when a simple tense works.
Last year, Margot (designs/designed/will design) a new line of summer dresses.
Before he votes tomorrow, Dale (researches/research/will research) each candidate’s positions
on the major issues.
The referee stopped the fight after the boxers (refuses/refused /will refuse) to follow the rules.
In English, we use the perfect tense when there are multiple timelines in a sentence. The perfect tense is

when we say “has” or “have” or “had” with the verb. If you read for context and read the entire sentence,
we should be able to “hear” when we need to use the perfect tense.
Many surfers enjoy paddling out, but few (rode/have ridden) waves over ten feet tall.
While the group of entrepreneurs claimed to all be successful, only a few (will start/have
started) their own businesses.
The bison (ate/had been eating) when the lions began their attack.
By the beginning of next year, the doctors (finish/finished/will have finished) their preliminary
research on lung cancer.
The conditional tense describes what would or could happen in the future. The kind of verb conjugation
that we need depends on how likely the outcome is to actually happen (probable, improbable,
impossible). Again, the Key here is to trust your ear and go with what sounds right to you.
If|make the free throw, we (will win/would win/would have won) the game.
IfImade the free throw, we (will win/would win/would have won) the game.
If|had made the free throw, we (will win/would win/would have won) the game.
The ACT also tests you on irregular verbs. For these verbs, just trust your ear and go with what sounds
correct to you.

Before the show (began/begun), the lights were dimmed.
The deliveryman had (rang/rung) the doorbell before dropping off the package.
By the time the meal was over, the boy had (ate/eaten) an entire bag of popcorn and had
(drank/drunk) a liter of cola.

© PrepPros 2025

-47-

PrepPros ACT English Course

TIP - Irregular Verbs
- “a” vs. “u” versions
aw

ai

ely

For many of the most difficult irregular verbs, there is an “a” version (ex: swam) and a “u” version (ex:
swum). We use these verbs incorrectly all of the time, so using your ear and trying to hear which one
sounds correct is difficult. All you need to do is remember the simple rules below:

With “has,” “have,” or “had” ===> Use the “u” version

(perfect tense)

Correct: Before you arrived, I had swum some laps.

With no “has,” “have,” or “had”

c="

Use the“a” version

(past tense)

Correct: I swam some laps this morning.
The most commonly tested irregular verbs following this pattern are below.

Verb

Past Tense

Perfect Tense

begin

began

has/have/had begun

drink

drank

has/have/had drunk

sink

sank

has/have/had sunk

swim

swam

has/have/had swum

run

ran

has/have/had run

sing

sang

has/have/had sung

Verb Tense Practice:
1.

The car accident on the freeway delayed my commute and (causes/caused) me to be late for the
job interview.

2.

After playing basketball for two hours, Jimmy (devours/devoured) a carnitas burrito and two
fish tacos.

3.

Itis impossible to believe that Andrew (tells/told) his parents what really happened.

4.

Before! woke up, Chris had already (swam/swum) twenty laps.

5.

Ifyou had ordered the tickets last week, they (would arrive/would have arrived) by now.

6.

The sign asked that you (be/are) polite to the waiters and tip well.

7.

The dance competition (began/begins) at 10am, and the awards ceremony then starts at 4pm.

8.

If] finish all of my homework, I (will get/get/would get) to go to the new Star Wars movie.

9.

The local pizza parlor (closes/closed) its doors for good last year.

10. Mary went to the mall and (buys/bought/buyed) a new outfit for her graduation party.
11. The ship had already been (sank/sunk) before the battle was finished.
12. If the rebels had won the war, the world would (of/have) been a very different place.

© PrepPros 2025

- 48 -

PrepPros ACT English Course

TIP - How to Spot Subject-Verb Agreement vs. Verb Tense Questions
Spotting verbs questions in general is pretty easy: the answer choices will have different forms of the
same verb. Knowing we are dealing with a verbs question is a good start, but to answer the question
correctly we need to know if we are being tested on subject-verb agreement or verb tense.
Subject-verb agreement questions always have one defining characteristic:

1.

Verbs in the answer choices have singular and plural versions. Look for “is” vs. “are,”
“has” vs. “have,” “was” vs. “were,” and any other verbs with a singular, like “runs,” vs. a
plural, like “run.” Anytime you see verbs that have a singular and plural version in the
answer choices, the question is testing you on subject-verb agreement.

The addition of solar panels to the roof

of a house in Nevada make the house

1.

Which choice makes the sentence

most grammatically acceptable:

?

A. NO CHANGE

on average 20% more energy efficient.

B.

makes

C.

have made

D.

were making

In this example, B is correct because the subject “addition” is singular. The only verb that matches
with “addition” is “makes.” Even though there are different tenses in the answer choices, we only need
to use subject-verb agreement to find the correct answer.
Verb tense questions always have two defining characteristics:

1.

Verbs in the answer choices are in different tenses. For example, if “requires,” “required,”
and “will require” are in the answer choices, the question is testing you on tense.

2.

Verbs in the answer choices do NOT have singular and plural versions. If there are not
options for singular and plural versions, subject-verb agreement is not being tested.

The girl scouts are hosting a bake sale

2.

Which choice makes the sentence

tomorrow to raise money. To get ready,

most grammatically acceptable:?

Adya would need to bake two trays of

A.

NO CHANGE

C.

needed

D.

needs

;

blondies and a box of donut holes.

B. was needing

In this example, D is correct because the verb must be present tense. In the previous sentence, the

verb “are” is present tense, so we know this sentence should also be in present tense. Answer choices
A, B, and C are in the wrong tense.

© PrepPros 2025

- 49 -

PrepPros ACT English Course

Chapter 4 Practice:
In-n-Out, known for its animal style burgers, and
Five Guys always tops the annual list of best
1

voODVUwmWM>rF

. NO CHANGE

. Five Guys, always topping
Five Guys always top

. Five Guys, always top

burgers.

The first row of the townhouses for sale in my
neighborhood has the best view of the beach.

. NO CHANGE

. neighborhood, having
neighborhood have

. neighborhood would have

2

In last night’s magic show, there was one rabbit,
3

two magician’s assistants, and ten doves.

. NO CHANGE

. there are
there were

. there is

The treehouse construction is almost complete.

. NO CHANGE

. Just needed

Anna would just need two more pieces of
4

just needs

. is in needing ofjust

plywood and a few more screws.

The list of upgrades that the school board

. NO CHANGE

promised, new chalkboards, a new swimming
pool, and a renovated teacher’s lounge, were
5

completed over the summer.
5

If|had a nickel for every time that I saw a dog
ride a bike, I would of been broke long ago.

. lounge, was completed
lounge were completed

. lounge was completed

. NO CHANGE

. bike, I have been
bike, I would have been

. bike, I was

6

Packing up the entire house and moving across

. NO CHANGE

. country, are

the country are such a hassle.
7

country is

. country, is

The innovative team at Apple, the company that
revolutionized the way that we listen to_music,
8

are planning to release their newest device next
8

month.

© PrepPros 2025

. NO CHANGE

>VOW

. music, is planning
music, planned

. music are planning

PrepPros ACT English Course

NO CHANGE

If Thomas would have finished his part by now,
9

finishes his part by now, we would be

we would of been done with the project already.

done

9

had finished his part by now, we would
have been done
Oo . finished his part by now, would be done

The pictures on the mantelpiece contain only the

10.

photo from the holidays that show the entire
10

family together.

GOD
GOD

NO CHANGE

>

NO CHANGE

showed
had shown

. shows

11.

The entire flock of geese stop at the pond in my
11

backyard during their migration south.

Before starting the 100-mile bike ride, the

NO CHANGE

flock of geese, stopping
flock of geese stops

. flock of geese, have stopped

12.

12

triathlon participants already running over
12

ride, the triathlon participants had
already ran
ride, the triathlon participants had

twenty miles.

already run
. ride, the triathlon participants already
run

Onion bagels and chive cream cheese is part of

13.

13

the daily specials at the Beachside Diner.
13

>GOW

NO CHANGE

cheese being part of the daily specials
cheese is part of the daily specials,

. cheese are part of the daily specials

When my grandfather played poker with us,

14.

14

nobody can tell when he is bluffing or when he is

>

NO CHANGE

When my grandfather plays poker with
us,

Playing poker with us,

telling the truth.

. When my grandfather was playing poker
with us

Photosynthesis, the process by which plants turn

15.

sunlight into energy, and cellular respiration, the
process by which humans turn sugars into

COM>

NO CHANGE

was confusing
would of been confusing

. were confusing

usable energy, has continued to be confusing to
15

the 8 grade class.
16.

In order to cook a perfect steak, harmony of
temperature and time are necessary to master.
16

© PrepPros 2025

wo>N

NO CHANGE

have been
were

is

PrepPros ACT English Course

onw>

While there are many crucial elements to
running a successful business - proper
management, effective marketing, and a
well-crafted product - the passion and drive of

NO CHANGE
was

has been
are

the CEO isthe most important.
17

Incredibly, as one of my food scientist colleagues

18.

mention, kombucha has been brewed for
18

thousands of years

COM>

NO CHANGE
mentions,

have mentioned,

. are mentioning

One hot summer day when I! was ten years old, I

19.

had did some kitesurfing for the first time.
19

COM>

NO CHANGE

tried
gone

. had tried

The encapsulation of the radioactive materials

20.

make the surrounding area safe.

GOD

NO CHANGE

have made
are making

. makes

20

Of the estimated 7,000 spoken languages in the
world, linguists say nearly half are likely to

21.

disappear in this century. In fact, they fell out of

D>Ccomw

are falling

. had fallen

21

use at a rate of about one every two weeks.

Government officials in Nepal have maintained
that the expertise of the Sherpas has protected

NO CHANGE

would of fallen

22.

22

many hikers from serious injuries or worse on

NO CHANGE

have protected
are protecting

. were protecting

Mount Everest.

Though many features of the film (such as the
color grading) enhances the viewer’s experience,
23

the audio is a bit choppy, which makes the film
painful to watch from beginning to end.

© PrepPros 2025

23.

COM>

NO CHANGE

has enhanced
was enhancing

. enhance

PrepPros ACT English Course

