Chapter 10: Tips for Comparing Passages Questions
In this chapter, we are focusing on how to best answer the 3 comparing passages questions at the end of the
dual text passages. Before we get to the tips, let’s review what dual text passages are and how to best approach
them.
Each ACT has 1 dual text passage that includes two short passages labelled as Passage A and Passage B.
The two passages discuss similar topics and are somehow related. For example, an Informational Passage
could have two scientists offering differing opinions on a recent discovery.
In Dual Text Passages, the questions go in the following order:
e

Passage A Questions

e

Passage B Questions

e

Comparing Passages Questions (3 questions)

How to Approach Dual Text Passages
When working on dual text passages, we recommend that you read each passage separately. Do not read
both passages before starting the questions. Instead, you should use the following approach:
1)

Read Passage A and answer questions for Passage A.

2)

Read Passage B and answer questions for Passage B.

3)

Answer Comparing Passages Questions.

Since the passages are shorter, most students find it easier to read the entire passage. You should still apply
whatever method you prefer from the ones we discussed in Chapter 2 when reading each passage.

If you work backwards, use the following approach:
1)

Answer questions for Passage A.

2)

Answer questions for Passage B.

3)

Answer Comparing Passages Questions.

Comparing Passages Questions
At the end of each dual text passage, there are 3 questions that ask about both passages — we call these
comparing passages questions. These questions are always the last 3 questions in the dual text passage.
Comparing passages questions can look like this:
Which of the following statements best

Which of the following statements about

captures the main difference in the purposes

instruments is most strongly supported by

of the two passages?

details provided in Passage A and Passage
B?

The ACT will have a box telling you that the question asks about both passages, so it 1s clear when you are
looking at comparing passages questions.

© PrepPros 2025

- 70 -

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

4 Tips for Comparing Passages Questions
To answer comparing passages questions correctly, you must use information from both passages. There are a
variety of question types that can appear in comparing passages questions, so we will just focus on the best tips
for how to approach these questions and find the correct answer.
Please note, these tips are in addition to all the other methods we have covered so far. You should still be
using the skills that you learned in Chapters 1-8 when answering comparing passages questions. The 4
tips below are additional tips that can help you better answer comparing passages questions.

Tip #1 — Read the Answer Choices Right Away
Comparing passages questions are generally quite broad, so you should always read the answer choices
right away. Once you have read the answer choices and know what the 4 options are, it is much easier to (1)
eliminate any answer choices that are clearly incorrect and (2) know what to look for in Passage A and Passage
B.

Tip #2 — Work Backwards More Actively with the Answer Choices
Comparing passages questions generally have longer answer choices because the answer choice must refer to
information in both passages. When you see longer answer choices, work backwards more actively and
look for specific details that do not match the passage. Often, multiple answer choices are partly correct, so
it is easier to look for what is incorrect about each answer choice rather than to focus on which answer choice
seems to be the most correct.
For example, if you see a question like this
1.

The primary purpose of both passages is to

A.

resolve a long-standing debate on the evolution of vampire bats.

B.

celebrate the findings of recent research by Brazilian scientists.

C.

present two competing theories on the development of echolocation in vampire bats.

D.

catalog evidence from multiple studies that supports a finding about vampire bats.

we need to pick an answer choice that matches both passages. Rather than looking for the correct answer, it is
often easier to eliminate answer choices that do not match one passage. For example, if Passage A only
presents one theory about the development of echolocation in bats, C is incorrect. Or if Passage B discusses a
long-standing debate but does not resolve the debate, A is incorrect. Working backwards with this type of
thinking makes finding the correct answer easier for questions like the example above.

Tip #3 — Beware of Half-Right Answer Choices
For comparing passages questions, the ACT loves writing answer choices that are halfway correct. Part of the
answer choice perfectly answers the question; however, there is something wrong with the remaining

portion of the answer choice. Students often pick these incorrect answer choices because they get excited
over the part that is correct and do not read the rest of the answer choice carefully enough. As always, we need
to be very picky when assessing each answer choice. This is especially true for comparing passages questions.

© PrepPros 2025

-7l1-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

The most common half-right answer choices appear in questions like this:

1.

Which choice best states the relationship between the two passages?
A.

Passage A provides an overview of a scientific discovery, while Passage B summarizes
the experiments that led to that discovery.

B.

Passage A summarizes a scientific finding, while Passage B focuses on the potential

C.

Passage A presents conflicting points of view on an issue, while Passage B presents

D.

Passage A considers how to best test two hypotheses, while Passage B argues that only

applications of that finding.
evidence supporting a single view on that issue.
one of the hypotheses 1s valid.
Notice how the first half of answer choices A and B are both very similar. These could both accurately
describe passage A, but only one can be correct — meaning that one of these answer choices must be half-right.
In this situation, it is important to focus on the second half of the answer choices to determine which one is
correct. As always, the correct answer must be 100% correct!

Tip #4 — Do Not Focus on the Identical Parts of the Answer Choices
Many comparing passages questions have portions of multiple answer choices that are identical, as we just saw
in the example on the previous page. When you see identical parts in the answer choices, do not focus on
the similarities; instead, focus on the differences. Students make the mistake of trying to figure out which
identical part is more correct, which is often impossible. Instead, you should focus on the differences in the
rest of the answer choice, as this is what actually determines which answer choice is the correct one.
To better illustrate how this can occur, let’s look at the example question below:
1.

How do the two passages differ in the attitudes of each author towards women serving in the
army?
A.

Smith implies that women should be prevented from serving in the army, whereas Jones

supports women serving in the army in non-combat roles.
B.

Smith believes that women with certain physical abilities can be considered for service in
the army, whereas Jones assumes that physical ability is unrelated to any person’s ability
to serve.

C.

Smith argues that service should be a personal choice regardless of gender, whereas Jones
contends that women are unsuitable to serve due to emotional instability.

D.

Smith asserts that anyone who can serve in the army should be able to do so, whereas
Jones argues that men and women should serve in gender-specific roles.

Here, the first half of answer choices C and D are both saying the same thing: anyone should be able to serve

in the army. Let’s assume Smith argues that in Passage A. If that is the case, there is no way to tell if C or D
is correct by focusing on the first half alone. Instead, we need to look at the rest of the answer choices and
focus on the differences.
Similarly, the second half of answer choices A and D are also making almost identical statements: men and

women should have separate roles in the army. These statements are not quite as identical as our first example,
but they are still very similar and could both be supported by Jones in Passage B. Again, if Jones did argue
that in Passage B, we should not focus on trying to determine which of those answer choices is more correct.
Instead, we should look at the first half of those answer choices and focus on the differences to find which one
is correct.

© PrepPros 2025

-72-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

