Chapter 12: 7 Tips to Maximize Your Reading Score
Before we go to the practice passages, let’s discuss 7 tips that can help you maximize your score. Some of
these will be review from what we have already covered in this course while others will be brand new tips and
skills that you can use to further improve your scores. Try to use these tips on the practice passages in the next
chapter and on practice ACTs. If you understand and use these tips, you will be prepared for your best ACT
Reading score ever!

7 Tips to Maximize Your Reading Score
Tip #1 — Keep it Moving
Time management ts critical for success on the Reading Test. Remember, you have 9 minutes per passage
for normal time and 15 minutes per passage for extended time, and you want to make sure that you finish

all 4 passages. To do this consistently, it is important to know when to guess and move on to the next
question.

In general, you should never spend more than | minute on any single question (1.5 minutes for extended
time). At first, it may be hard to manage time and know when to move on, but you will get a better sense of
time management as you complete practice ACTs. With practice, you will develop a voice in your head
saying, “It’s time to bubble in your best guess and move on.”
This is especially true on the first 4-6 questions of each passage, where you need to follow the 30-second
rule! If you cannot find the correct part of the passage quickly, circle the question number and move on. You
may come across the evidence as you answer questions in the rest of the passage. You can always go back and
change your answer if you find the evidence later.
We know it feels weird moving on without being confident in your answer choice but knowing when to move
on will increase your score. You will be able to answer more questions and avoid guessing as time is running
out.

Tip #2 — Circle Guesses; Box Non-Confident Answers
Whenever you guess on a question, circle the question number on your test. If you finish with time left,
go back to the circled questions you guessed on and spend more time looking for the Waldo. The question
may also seem easier when you come back to it a second time.
If you are not confident in your answer, box the question number on your test. If you have time left after
going back to the circled questions you guessed on, you can look over these boxed questions again. Only
change your answer if you have a very good reason! You are usually correct on your first attempt.
However, if you realize you misread the question, did not notice a detail in the passage, or notice something
that makes the answer choice you selected incorrect, change you answer.

Tip #3 — Never Worry About Patterns in the Answer Choices
“T bubbled in A and F for the last 4 questions. There is no way this one can be A again, right??” WRONG!
When answering a question, only focus on that question. Never let any pattern in the answer choices

affect which answer choice you pick. Sometimes, the same spot on the scantron sheet is correct 4 or even 5
times in arow on the ACT. It is also possible that you answered one of the previous questions incorrectly, and
there are not supposed to be 4 or 5 inarow. There is no way for you to know on test day, so just focus on
selecting what you think is correct for each question.

© PrepPros 2025

- 89 -

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

Tip #4 — Boring is Better
Boring answer choices are usually better on the ACT. If you are ever between two answer choices, always
pick the more boring answer choice! The more specific an answer choice is, the more likely something in
that answer choice is incorrect. Remember, an answer choice must be 100% correct to be correct.
The challenge is that we do not like to pick boring answer choices, especially on challenging questions. An
answer choice with more details is much easier to come up with a story as to why the answer could be correct,
which makes you feel better bubbling it in. Your job is to pick the answer choice that is supported by the
passage, not the one that feels best to you. So again, when you are between two answer choices, pick the
boring one with fewer details.

Tip #5 — Beware of Keyword Matching
Anytime you see words in an answer choice that directly match words from the passage, proceed with caution.
Make sure the entire answer choice is correct. Matching keywords may be in the correct answer choice, but
they can also be in incorrect answer choices that are half-truths, where part of the answer choice perfectly
matches the passage but another part is incorrect. Students often mistakenly pick these incorrect answer
choices because the keywords match. Never just match keywords; always make sure the answer choice
you Select is 100% correct.

Tip #6 — Do Not Over-Annotate
Some students annotate a lot. Others make no annotations at all. There is no nght or wrong way to annotate,
so you need to find what works best for you. What is most important is to make sure that annotating is
helping you better understand the passage and work through the questions more efficiently. If you are
underlining 50% of the passage, those are not helpful annotations. If you are writing down notes after each

paragraph but never use those notes, you are wasting time.
Proper annotations should help you maintain focus as you read, increase your comprehension of what

you read, and know where in the passage to go when working through the questions. As we discussed
earlier in this course, there is no best way to annotate for everyone: how much you annotate and what types of
annotations you use varies from student to student. On practice ACTs, try different methods for
annotation and find what works best for you.

Tip #7 — Make the Most of Practice ACTs
Practice ACTs are the best way to improve on the Reading Test...if you are using and reviewing them
properly. Here are some tips for how to make the most of your practice ACTs:
1.

Always time practice ACTs strictly. Never give yourself extra time to finish the section and see
how you would have scored. It will give you false confidence for how much you are improving.

2.

Review your mistakes thoroughly. Whenever you answer a question incorrectly, go back to the
passage and find the evidence for the correct answer. Make sure you identify why your answer choice
was incorrect. It is critical to learn from every single mistake you make to continuously improve.

3.

Be obsessive about improving. Students who improve the most on the Reading Test are the ones
who are most obsessive about learning from their mistakes. After each question, try to figure out why
you missed the question. Did you not read the question carefully enough? Were you answering your
own question and not exactly what the ACT was asking you? Did you not recognize the type of
question? Once you figure out why you made the mistake, think about how you can avoid the mistake
in the future. If necessary, go review any topic(s) from the chapters we have already covered.

© PrepPros 2025

- 90 -

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

