Chapter 11: Working Backwards
As promised, we are back to working backwards! Now that you have a much better understanding of the ACT
Reading Test, you are ready to learn how to work backwards. Working backwards is not recommended for
all students, but it is an approach that may help you improve your score.
We do recommend that all students know how to work backwards in case you mess up the pacing on test

day and need to work backwards on the final passage, so do not just skip this chapter if working backwards
is not your preferred method.

Is Working Backwards for Me?
What Types of Students Should Work Backwards?
In general, we recommend working backwards in 4 situations:
1)

You cannot finish the passages in time with any method that involves reading the passage first.

If using the other methods that we discussed in Chapter 3 are too slow for you, working backwards
might be a good fit for you.
2)

You find yourself not recalling what you read at the end of the passage. If you do not have good

recall of what you read, you are probably wasting time reading the passage.
3)

You score better working backwards. For students who are able to finish the passages but are tight
on time or barely finish and feel that timing and not comprehension is their biggest issue, working

backwards might help you improve your score. If this sounds like you, try it out and see if working
backwards is a good fit for you.
4)

You mismanage time and have less than 4 minutes to complete the final passage. If you have that

little time left, reading the passage will use up most of your time. You will most likely be able to
answer more questions correctly by going straight to the questions.

What Types of Students Should Not Work Backwards?
We do not recommend working backwards for the following 2 situations:
1)

You can finish the passages in time with the Big Read, the Big Read with Notes, or Label then

Read. If you are a faster reader and time management is not an issue for you, reading the entire
passage will likely help you score higher than working backwards. It’s usually harder to find the
Waldo if you have not read the entire passage.
2)

You are aiming for a score of 32-36. To score a 32-36, you can usually only miss 0-3 questions. If

you never read the passage, you are far more likely to get questions wrong because you did not find
the correct evidence. That being said, we have had students score perfectly Working Backwards,
so it is all about finding what approach is best for you. If you have high scoring goals and cannot
finish the passages with any other methods, working backwards still may be best for you.

How To Tell If Working Backwards Is for You?
The best way to see if working backwards helps you is to try it on practice passages and practice tests. If
working backwards sounds like it might help you, try it out on! You may find that it improves your score, or
you may find that you hate it.

© PrepPros 2025

-73-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

How to Work Backwards
With working backwards, you go straight to the questions and never read the entire passage. Working
backwards successfully requires answering the questions out of order, making quick decisions about
which questions to answer, knowing when to give up on a question and move on, and a lot of thinking on

the fly. It is somewhat of a chaotic approach at times, and the exact approach you use will vary based on the
types of questions in the passage and on your own personal reading and skimming skills. Because of this,
working backwards is certainly not a method that all students will enjoy, and it generally takes lots of
practice to master.

Let’s go over the general steps for working backwards. As we go over these steps, remember this is not an
exact order but a general recommendation, so do not feel the need to stick to the exact order below as you
work through practice passages.
1)

Go straight to the questions before reading the passage.

2)

Skip any broad passage questions that ask about the entire passage. Save those for last.

3)

Skip any questions that require reading various parts of the passage. Save those for later.

o

Chronological Order
=»

©

Example: Which of the following events occurs in the passage first chronologically?

Questions that require finding various details in the passage.
=»

Example: The author would most likely agree with which of the following
statements?

o

Vague questions that have no good keywords to skim for.
»

4)

Example: As summarized in the passage, the study focuses primarily on:

Start with line reference questions or questions that references a specific paragraph (Ex: The

main idea of the third paragraph...). Other easy questions to answer right away are words in
context questions. Use the 2-sentence rule for these questions and read for more context if necessary.
5)

Next, look for clear evidence questions with strong primary keywords. Look for capitalized
words, numbers, other unique keywords that are easier to find in the passage.
O

Look for clear evidence questions with shorter answer choices, as these are often easier to
find and faster to answer.

©

Skip clear evidence questions with weak keywords and save those for later unless you
already know where to find the evidence from the part of the passage you have already read.

6)

Next, answer inference questions. Start with inference questions with strong primary keywords.

©

Skip inference questions with weak keywords and save those for later unless you already
know where to go in the passage from the portions of the passage you have already read as
you have answered other questions.

O

Use the answer choices more actively. For inference questions the Waldo will not be as
clear, so knowing the 4 options can make it easier and faster for you to find the evidence in
the passage, eliminate incorrect answer choices, and answer the question correctly.

© PrepPros 2025

- 74 -

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

7)

Purpose questions are generally best saved for answering later, but it depends on the keywords.
©

Ifa purpose question has line references, you can usually answer the question right

away. Be sure to read for enough context to answer the question properly. If you do not
have enough context yet to answer the question, save it for later.
©

Ifa purpose question has a strong primary keyword, go look for that keyword, read for

as much context as necessary, and answer the question. If you cannot find the keyword
after 30 seconds, move on to the next question and come back the question later.
©

Ifa purpose question is vague and/or you do not have strong keyword(s) to skim for in

the passage, skip the question and save it for later.
O

Regardless of the keywords, if you read a purpose question and know where to go in the
passage, you can answer the question at that time (as long as you have read for enough
context).

8)

Answer the broad passage questions or any other questions that you have skipped last. If you
are running out of time, answer the broad passage questions using the information you know about the
passage before answering other ones you have skipped.

© PrepPros 2025

-75-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

Should I Answer This Question Right Away or Save for Later?
One essential skill to working backwards is learning how to tell when you should answer a question

right away and when you should skip the question and save it for later. Learning this skill takes lots of
practice because there is no simple set of rules to follow. Every question is a judgment call that depends on the
wording of the question, the keywords (or lack thereof) in the question, the parts of the passages you have read
so far, and the answer choices.
To give you a better sense of how to know when it is best to answer the question right away and when it is best
to save it for later, let’s go over a few questions for each of the major question types.

Line Reference Questions
Always answer line reference questions right away. Since these questions tell you where to go, you never
need to search for these questions. Read for context and answer the question. It is important to take time to
read for enough context to answer these questions correctly, so you can (and often should) read more than 2
sentences before and after the lines in the question.

Clear Evidence Questions
Clear evidence questions are usually easier to answer right away, but it depends on the strength of the
keywords and the answer choices. Let’s go over some examples to highlight the differences.
Answer Right Away

1.

According to the passage, Jupiter lost its water

2.

Based on the passage, before it reached

due to:

Amsterdam, Shelly’s manuscript was sent to:

A.

loss of atmosphere.

A.

New York, but the British objected and

B.

changes in its magnetic field.

C.

rising levels of carbon dioxide.

B.

London, but was intercepted by the Spanish

D.

unchecked wind currents on its surface.
C.

New York, but the British stole it and

D.

London, but the Spanish purchased it and

brought it to Italy.

and brought to Portugal.
brought it to Spain.
brought it to Italy.

Answer clear evidence questions with strong primary keyword(s) right away.
Save For Later

3.

The passage indicates that the maps were

4.

Inthe passage, one challenge facing Clark in

beneficial in that they:

designing his fuel alternative is the:

A.

A.

encouraged explorers to sail farther off the
coast of Indonesia.

B.

hydrogen and oxygen.

served as the basis for the first European

B.

competition for government funding from

C.

high price of lithium and manufactured

maps of Southeast Asia.
C.

provided accurate locations of port cities

D.

included 18 islands that had not been in

lack of technology to split water into

other alternative fuel companies.

Surat and Melaka.

crystals.
D.

design flaws in photovoltaic solar cell

Raymond’s map.
Save questions without strong primary keywords and questions with answer choices that may be
scattered throughout the passage for later.

© PrepPros 2025

- 76-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

Hard To Tell

The narrator indicates that what the narrator

2.

remembers most about Lin is Lin’s:

Gap,

The passage makes clear that sensory evaluators
who specialize in ice cream:

high-pitched voice.

A.

unique hairstyle.

rarely work on market research panels for
multiple companies.

expensive jewelry.

B.

undergo multiple years of specialized
training with culinary experts.

expressive storytelling.
C.

have unique taste buds that can better
perceive flavors at lower temperatures.

D.

are heavily involved in the design of new
flavors.

Many other clear evidence questions may fall in between. For these questions, use your best judgment
based on what you have read. If you think you have good keyword(s) from the question and/or answer
choices or already know where to go based on what you have read so far, answer the question right away. If
not, skip the question and save it for later. Questions like these can be easy to get stuck on for too long, so be
sure to always follow the 30-second rule.

Inference Questions
Inference questions are usually saved for later. As with clear evidence questions, it depends on the strength of
the keyword(s) and the answer choices. In general, you should almost always look at the answer choices
for inference questions right away. Let’s go over some examples to highlight the differences.
Answer Right Away

1.

It can be inferred that the Ben’s response to the

2.

standing ovation is intended to point out that:

The passage most strongly suggests that dark
chocolate:

A

Ben did not expect the audience’s reaction.

B.

Ben’s piano doesn’t play by itself.

C.

The audience isn’t qualified to judge the

B.

supports the immune system.

quality of Ben’s performance.

C.

increases blood flow to the brain.

The audience grasps the meaning of the

D

provides 6 types of essential vitamins.

D.

A.

contains enough caffeine to have a minor
impact on mood and energy.

piece Ben selected to play.
Answer inference questions with strong primary keyword(s) that point to a specific part of the passage
right away.

Save For Later
3.

Which of the following assertions about fabric is

4,

The passage most strongly suggests that Goya

most strongly supported by details in the

would have gained more notoriety in his lifetime

passage?

if he:

A.

A.

Thread count is not directly proportional to

B.
C.

Fabric should be revered and never treated

B.

sold more of his artwork at public auctions.

like clothing.

C.

had not spent his early years drawing

D.

had a less rebellious character.

Maintaining proper humidity levels is

cartoons.

essential to storing bolts of fabric.
D.

painted in a style that was more popular in

the 18" century.

the softness rating of a fabric.

Selling bolts of partially used fabric is
disrespectful to the original creator.

Save questions without strong primary keywords and questions with answer choices that may be
scattered throughout the passage for later.

© PrepPros 2025

-77-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

Hard To Tell

5.

It can most reasonably be inferred that the

6.

The passage most strongly implies that one way

author’s statements about the use of photographs

cable subscribers are similar to baseball fans is

in neuroscience apply to photographs taken in

that the fans:

what time period:

A. have diverse taste in entertainment.

A.

B.

Only in the twenty years after the invention

are willing to pay more for streaming

of the camera.
B.

content.

Any time period since digital photographs

C.

display strong time management skills.

were first taken.

D.

organize their schedules to watch television.

C.

Inthe nineteenth and twentieth centuries.

D.

Any time period prior to the digital age, but

not beyond.
Many other inference questions may fall in between. For these questions, use your best judgment based on

what you have read. If you think you have good keyword(s) from the question and/or answer choices or
already know where to go in the passage based on what you have read so far, answer the question right away.
If not, skip the question and save it for later. Questions like these can be easy to get stuck on for too long, so
be sure to always follow the 30-second rule.

Purpose Questions
Any purpose question that requires an understanding of the greater context of the passage should be

saved for later (Ex: question 1 below). Until you have read more of the passage, you do not have the context
to answer the question properly. Questions like this should be answered right before broad passage questions.
Some purpose questions have line references within a specific paragraph (Ex: question 2 below). You

can answer these questions right away. As always, make sure that you read for enough context and read the
entire paragraph if necessary.
Save for Later
1.

Answer Right Away

The main function of the third paragraph (lines

2.

The last sentence of the fifth paragraph serves

25-33) is to:

to:

A.

A.

make clear the Mary’s admiration for the
clothing in the windows.

B.

assessing the sugar content in fruits.

illustrate Mary’s fascination with the neon

B.

signs that shine through the fog.
C.

explain how to improve the sweetness or

oranges.

present Mary’s thoughts on the shops she

C.

has visited several times before.
D.

call into question the methods for

summarize Burnett’s recommendation for
orange farmers

describe Mary’s memories of a place that

D.

she once called home.

emphasize that farmers are ultimately
responsible for their own decisions.

When answering purpose questions, it is important to always read for context — as much as you need. You
will often need to read an entire paragraph or more. Make sure that you take the time to do that and do not
answer purpose questions too quickly.

© PrepPros 2025

- 78 -

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

Purpose questions without line references or references to a specific paragraph are usually answered in
the middle or saved for later depending on how strong the keyword(s) in the question are.
Answer Right Away

1.

Hard To Tell

The author most likely includes the list of

2.

The details about the initial response to the water

mammals that live in Giant Sequoia trees in

treatment plant opening serve to:

order to:

A. present specific examples of criticism from

A.

highlight the need to limit the number of

experts.

visitors to the national forests.
B.

B.

demonstrate the number of species that rely

the new plant was prone to failure.

on the trees for food.
C.

suggest that the local governor is naive

D.

verify that the protective measures are

provide support for the author’s opinion that

C.

emphasize the ongoing conflict between the
rich and poor members of the community.

about preserving natural habitats.

D.

provide evidence to undermine Hess’s
position.

working.
For purpose questions with stronger keyword(s) that you can likely find in the passage quickly, answer

the question right away. Or if you remember where to go in the passage from what you have already read,
answer the question night away. If you have trouble finding the right part of the passage, skip the question and
come back to it later.
For purpose questions with keyword(s) that may be harder to find, skip the question and save the

question for later. In general, if you read a purpose question and feel like it might be hard to locate the nght
part of the passage, skip it and come back to it later. As you answer more questions, you will continue to read
more of the passage, so you will be able to more quickly find where to go when you return to this question
later.

Question Types to Always Answer Last
At this point in this course, you already know to save broad passage questions for last. What are some
other types of questions that you should always save for last when working backwards?

1) Chronological Order
Save any questions that ask about the chronological order of events in the passage for last. For example, a
chronological order question might look like this:
1.

Which of the following events referred to in the passage occurred last chronologically?

Gap,

Maya went surfing in the Pacific Ocean.
Maya’s brother came home from Paris.
Maya and Emily arrived at the art museum.

Maya’s mother discovered her passion for painting.

Answering these questions requires you to find 4 events in the passage, so it is time consuming and will be
faster and easier to answer last. Chronological Order questions are very difficult when working
backwards, so you may have to make an educated guess on these questions.

© PrepPros 2025

- 79 -

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

2) Questions That Require Finding Various Details in The Passage
Certain questions require that you find various details from the answer choices in multiple parts of the passage.
These questions must be saved for last, as finding multiple pieces of evidence in the passage is challenging
and time-consuming when working backwards. For example, if a question asks:
1.

Which of the following details from the passage best supports the author’s claim about the

importance of posture in ballet performance?
A.

Posture is the first thing taught in introductory dance classes.

B.

The awards Misty Copeland received for her performance during Swan Lake.

C.

The first ballet slippers were described as “flying machines” by the inventor.

D.

Training for ballet focuses on lengthening the spine and keeping strong body alignment.

We need to find where all 4 answer choices are in the passage to determine which best supports the author’s
claim about the importance of posture in ballet. For a question like this, the answer choices are most often
scattered throughout the passage, making them hard to find. These questions are very difficult to do when
working backwards, so you may have to make an educated guess and move on to stay on pace.

3) Vague Questions That Have No Good Keywords to Skim For.
For vague questions that have no good keyword(s) to skim for, we need to use the answer choices. For these
questions, the answer choices may not make it clear where to look in the passage. The answer choices also
may seem like they can be scattered throughout the passage. In this situation, finding the Waldo quickly is
very difficult. We want to save these questions for last to maximize the chance that we read the relevant
part of the passage while answering the rest of the questions.
1.

Which of the following statements about muscle atrophy is best supported by the passage?

GaAWpY

Muscle atrophy does not occur until age 30 and then increases at a constant annual rate.
Muscle atrophy is accompanied by decreasing levels of calcium in the bones.
The severity of muscle atrophy depends on diet and exercise.
Genetics do not play a significant role in muscle atrophy.

Based on the question and the answer choices, we do not have anything specific to look for other than “muscle
atrophy.” If the passage discusses muscle atrophy throughout, we have no specific place in the passage to
look. To answer this question, we need to find a Waldo in the passage that matches one of the answer choices.
Without having read the passage, this is extremely difficult, so we save this question for last. After answering
the rest of the questions and reading parts of the passage, we have a much better chance of having already read
the relevant part of the passage or having an idea of where to look for the Waldo. If you cannot find the
evidence and need to move on, eliminate any incorrect answer choices, bubble in your best guess, and

move on. It is important to not get stuck on these questions for too long.

**Note: No matter what method you use, these 3 types of questions
are often good to skip and answer later!

© PrepPros 2025

- 80 -

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

How To Work Backward on Dual Text Passages
On dual text passages, there are 2 methods for working backwards. For either method, you want to focus on
one passage at a time.

Method #1 — Classic Approach (Passage A, Passage B, then Comparing Passages)
For the first method, you will answer Passage A questions, Passage B questions, and then questions about both
passages.

1)

Answer questions for Passage A. You do not need to answer the questions in order. Use the same
approaches we have discussed for the regular passages.

2)

Answer questions for Passage B.

3)

Answer Comparing Passages Questions. Go back to passages A and B and read more as necessary.
Be sure to use the answer choices to your advantage on both passage questions. Reading the answer
choices right away is often helpful. Comparing passages questions are difficult when working
backwards, so make sure you go not get stuck on these questions.

Method #2 — Elimination for Comparing Passages Questions
With this method, you will go to comparing passages questions after reading each passage to eliminate

any incorrect answer choices. Eliminating answer choices as you go, rather than saving comparing passages
questions for last, can help make sure you remember what each passage is about more clearly as you assess if
the answer choices match the passage or not.
1)

Answer questions for Passage A. You do not need to answer the questions in order. Use the same
approaches we have discussed for the regular passages.

2)

Go to comparing passages questions. Read the questions and the answer choices.

3)

As you read each question, eliminate any answer choice that does not match what you know

from Passage A. Since you just did Passage A, you will remember passage A well at this point.
Cross-out any incorrect answer choices. Only eliminate answer choices that you are sure are
incorrect.
4)

Answer questions for Passage B.

5)

Go to comparing passages questions. Read the questions and the remaining answer choices.

6)

As you read each question, eliminate any answer choice that does not match what you know

from Passage B. Cross-out any incorrect answer choices. If you know the correct answer choice,
bubble it in.
7)

Ifyou cannot tell which answer choice is correct, go back to the passages. This is a good time to
check your watch. Read more (if you have time) and try to find the correct answer.

8)

Ifyou are out of time and need to move on, make an educated guess, circle the question number,
and move on. Both passage questions are difficult when working backwards, so make sure you do
not get stuck on these questions.

© PrepPros 2025

-8]-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

To show you how method #2 works, let’s consider the following question:
1.

The authors of passage A and passage B

2.

praise Hunt for his use of:

GaAWpY

Which of the following statements best captures
a difference in the purpose of the passages?

texture in his collages.

A.

sand and shells in his modern art.

Passage A provides a glimpse into the
design of the Tesla, while Passage B

creative lighting in his gallery.

criticizes Tesla’s manufacturing process.

interactive artwork in his shows.

Passage A provides an overview of how
Tesla manufactures its cars, while Passage B
provides a glimpse into Tesla’s creative
process.

Passage A provides a narrative concerning
how Tesla differs from other electric

vehicles, while Passage B provides an
overview of Tesla’s battery technology.
Passage A provides a critique of the interior
design of Tesla cars, while Passage B
provides a summary of how Tesla builds its
cars.

This method can be used for almost all both passages questions. As always, there is no best method. Try
both approaches and see which one work best for you on both passage questions.

© PrepPros 2025

- 82
-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

7 Tips for Working Backwards
Here are 7 tips that are crucial for mastering working backwards. These tips are ones you can use in addition
to all the tips we have already learned in this course.

Tip #1: Follow the 30-Second Rule
Time management ts crucial with working backwards. The biggest mistake students make when working
backwards is getting stuck on a question for too long. This most commonly occurs when students are
skimming the passage and cannot find the keyword(s). If you cannot find the keyword(s) that you are
looking for after 30 seconds, circle the number, skip the question, and come back to it.

As you answer the rest of the questions, you may come across the keyword(s) and can come back and answer
the question. If you find the keyword(s), come back to the question, bubble in the correct answer, and
put a slash through the circle, so you know that you found the evidence and did not guess.
If you come back to the question, still cannot find the keyword(s), and need to move on, bubble in your best
guess. It is better to guess on some questions and finish all 4 passages than it is to get stuck and not finish all 4
passages.

Tip #2: Read for More Context
The 2-sentence rule is a good start, but you may need to read more than that to understand the part of the
passage you are in. Since you are not taking time to read the entire passage, you have more time to read for
context as you answer the questions. For some questions, you may need to read the entire paragraph. Do it!
Do not limit yourself with the 2-sentence rule; read for as much context as you need to find the Waldo

and answer the question correctly.

Tip #3: The Answer Choices Are Your Friends
When working backwards, you should rely on the answer choices more than with any of our other methods. In
general, you should read most answer choices quickly when working backwards. That does not mean that
you need to read the answer choices immediately, but the information in the answer choices can help you in a
variety of ways. How quickly you read the answer choices is a judgment call that you can make after you
read the question.

Let’s show you how the answer choices can help with the example below:
1.

The passage indicates that which of the following is true of the first land mammals?
A.

They appeared during the early Triassic period.

B.

They preceded the first reptiles.

C.

They had many specializations.

D.

They are present in the fossil record up to 160 million years ago.

Reading the answer choices can help you identify where to go in the passage, find other keyword(s) to
potentially search for, and identify the Waldo more quickly. If you know the 4 options for the correct answer,
you can more quickly recognize when you found Waldo. In addition, as you read the answer choice you might
realize that you already have read the part of the passage you are looking for.

© PrepPros 2025

- 83-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

Tip #4: Know When to Give Up and Move On.
This directly relates to tip #1. As you practice, try to find your give-up point. You should have a voice in
your head that goes, “Ok, I cannot find this one. It is time to move on” and you need to listen to that

voice on test day! I know this is difficult since you know that the answer is somewhere right in the passage,
but it is important to know your give-up point and move on. This will help you improve your time
management and make sure that you stay on pace to finish all 4 passages.

Tip #5: Work Backwards (Especially When You Can’t Find Waldo)
It is likely that you will not be able to find the Waldo every time working backwards, and that is okay. For
any question where you cannot find the Waldo, read the answer choices like a lawyer and eliminate

incorrect answer choices. You will most likely use this method for the questions that you have skipped and
saved for last. By this time, you should have a general idea of what the passage is about, and you can use this
knowledge to eliminate answer choices that seem incorrect. Remember, if you know that 3 answers are
incorrect, you have found the correct answer! Even if you cannot tell which answer is correct, working
backwards can help you improve your chances of guessing the right answer.

Tip #6: Educated Guesses Are Better Than Not Finishing
The goal with working backwards it to finish all 36 questions. You are most likely not going to be 100%
confident on all your answer choices; that is expected with working backwards. To work backwards properly,
you will need to answer some questions when you are 80% sure or even 50% sure that you have found the
right answer. You need to get comfortable with making an educated guess and moving on. This is
essential to managing your time well and staying on pace. For any questions where you are making an
educated guess, box the question number.
It is better to finish all 36 questions and make some educated guesses along the way than to run out of

time and blindly guess on questions at the end. Also, if you finish the test and still have some time left, you
can always go back to the boxed questions to see if you can find the evidence in the passage.

Tip #7: Working Backwards Takes Practice
Do not expect working backwards to feel easy the first time (or even 5 times) you try it. For most

students, working backwards feels like a struggle at first. That is not unexpected, as you are trying to use an
entirely new method to complete a reading comprehension passage. It takes lots of practice to master all the
skills we have just discussed. As you practice, you will improve your ability to break down the questions,
skim for the keywords, use the answer choices to your advantage, and properly manage time.
After each practice passage, try to ask yourself the following questions:
e

How was my pacing?

e

Did I miss a keyword that could have helped me find the Waldo more quickly or easily?

e

Did I answer the questions in the best order possible?

e

Did I read for enough context?

e

Did I get stuck on a question for too long?

e

Could I have used the answer choices better?

As you answer these questions, take note of what you can do better on your next practice passage. With
practice, working backwards will start to feel more natural and your scores will improve if this is the right
method for you.

© PrepPros 2025

- 84-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

Working Backwards Practice Passage #1: Try the following passage working backwards.

Quickly taking their cue from him, the bassist

Literary Narrative: This passage is adapted from the
novel The Fisher King by Paule Marshall.

45 reached for his bow, the drummer for his brushes, the

two of them also treating the original as if it were a

It was nearing the end of the second set, the jazz

serious piece of music.

now winding down when Hattie heard Abe Kaiser at the
microphone call Everett Payne’s name. Heard his name

Everett Payne took his time paying his respects to the

and, to her surprise, saw him slowly stand up in the
5 bullpen up front. She hadn’t seen him join the other

tune as written, and once that was done, he hunched closer
50 to the piano, angled his head sharply to the left,

local musicians, including Shades Bowen with his tenor

completely closed the curtain of his gain, and with his

sax, in what was called the bullpen, which was simply a

hands commanding the length and breadth of the keyboard

dozen or so chairs grouped near the bandstand. The

he unleashed a dazzling pyrotechnic of chords (you could

young locals gathered there each Sunday evening

almost see their colors), polyrhythms, seemingly unrelated

10 hoping for a chance to perform because toward the end

harmonies, and ideas — fresh, brash, outrageous ideas. It

of the final set, the custom was to invite one or two of

was an outpouring of ideas and feeling informed by his

them to sit in with the band. They sometimes even got

own brand of lyricism and lit from time to time by flashes

to choose the tune they wanted to play.

of the recognizable melody. He continued to

acknowledge the little simple-minded tune, while at the

This Sunday, Everett Payne, not long out of the

same time furiously recasting and reinventing it an image

15 army, was the one being invited to sit in.

all his own.

Breath held, Hattie watched him separate himself

A collective in-suck of breath throughout the club.

from the hopefuls and approach the stand, taking his

Where, Hattie wondered, did he come by the dazzling

time, moving with what almost seemed a deliberate

pause between each step. The crowd waiting.

20

That was his way, Hattie knew. His body moving

array of ideas and wealth of feeling? What was the
65 source? It had to do, she speculated, listening intently,

with the way he held his head, angled to the left like that,

absentmindedly through space, his head, his thoughts on

tilted towards both heaven and earth. His right side, his

something other than his surroundings, and his eyes like

right ear directed skyward, hearing up there, in the Upper

a curtain he occasionally drew aside a fraction of an
inch to peer out at the world. A world far less

25 interesting than the music inside his head.

Room among the stars Mahalia sang about a new kind of
70 music: splintered, atonal, profane, and possessing a

wonderful dissonance that spoke to him, to his soul-case.

She watched now as he slowly mounted the

For him, this was the true music of the spheres, of the

bandstand and conferred with the bassist and drummer,

maelstrom up there. When at the piano, he kept his right

those two were all he would need. Then, without

ear tune to it at all times, letting it guide him, inspire him.

announcing the name of the tune he intended playing,

His other ear? It remained earthbound, trained on the

30 without in any way acknowledging the audience, he sat

bedrock that for him was Bach and the blues.

down at the piano and brought his hands — large hands,

Again and again he took them on a joyous, terrifying

the fingers long and played and slightly arched — down

roller coaster of a ride it seemed to Hattie, and when he

on the opening bars of “Sonny Boy Blue.”
“Sonny Boy Blue!” That hokey-doke tune!
35

finally deposited them on terra firma after twenty minutes,
80 everyone in the Putnam Royal could only sit there as if

they were in church and weren’t supposed to clap.

Around her, the purists looked at each other from

Overcame. Until finally Alvin Edwards, who lived on

behind their regulation shades and slouched in their

Decatur Street and played trumpet in the school band,

chairs in open disgust.

At first, hokey though it was, he played the song straight
through as written, the rather introduction, verse, and
40 chorus. And he did so with great care, although at a

slower tempo than was called for and with a formality

leaped to his feet and renamed him.
95

Alvin brought everyone up with him, including the
purists who normally refused to applaud even genius.

They too stood up in languid praise of him.

that lent the Tin Pan Alley tune a depth and

thoughtfulness no one else would have accorded it.

© PrepPros 2025

~ 85
-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

. It can be reasonable inferred from the passage that

. The passage initially portrays the purists most

Shades Bowen:

nearly as:

A.

did not accompany Everett Payne as he played

F.

“Sonny Boy Blue.”

G.

snobbish and intolerant.

B.

had been in the army with Everett Payne.

H.

rational and well-educated.

C.

was the oldest musician in the bullpen

J.

inexperienced and uninhibited.

D.

did not usually allow local musicians to play

knowledgeable and open minded.

with the band

. It can reasonably be inferred from the passage that
Hattie believed Bach and the blue (line 76) were the:
. The main purpose of the statement in lines 62 is to:
F.

initially had for Everett Payne’s performance.
G.

J.

foundation of Everett Payne’s inventive Piano
playing.

C.

counteract the narrator’s description of Everett
Payne’s performance.

musical influences that Everett Payne tried to

avoid representing when he played piano.
B.

inform the reader of the audience’s reaction to

Everett Payne’s performance.
H.

A.

illustrate the high expectations the audience

true music of the heavens that inspired Everett
Payne’s creativity as a piano player.

D.

provide proof that Everett Payne was well

reason why Everett Payne’s piano-playing
abilities limited him to Tin Pan Alley tunes.

know to the audience.
. According to the passage, when Everett Payne first
. The passage most strongly suggests that the second

played “Sonny Boy Blue” straight through, he did

set of the jazz shows at the club is:

SO:

A.

the final set.

F.

more slowly than was intended by the composer.

B.

much longer than the first set.

G.

after it had been suggested by Abe Kaiser.

C.

followed by a third set on Sunday nights.

H.

against the wishes of the bassist and drummer.

D.

performed solely by musicians in the bullpen.

J.

without following the original tune.

. Which of the following details is used in the

. According to the passage, Hattie speculated that the

passage to indicate how the purists in the audience

source of Everett Payne’s musical ideas and feeling

initially reacted to Everett Payne’s choice of music?

during “Sonny Boy Blue” was in:

F.

The overall silence of the audience, including
the purists.

G.

The description of the audience’s collective insuck of breath.

H.

The posture the purists assumed in their seats.

J.

The fact that the purists stood up.

Gap,

the way he tilted his head.
the simplemindedness of the song.
his ability to play with great formality.
his connection with the silent audience.

. The narrator states that to Hattie, Everett Payne’s
performance was:

. According to the narrator, what did Hattie see
Everett Payne do prior to playing “Sonny Boy
Blue”?

pGan

Move quickly from his seat to the bandstand.

Study the audience around him.
Confer with the bassist and drummer.
Announce the name of the tune he was going to

play.

© PrepPros 2025

F.

overly slow and formal.

G.

deliberate yet absentminded.

H.

like a song played in a church.

J.

aroller coaster of a ride.

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

Working Backwards Practice Passage #2: Try the following passage working backwards.

Humanities: This passage is adapted from the essay
“My Life with a Field Guide” by Diana Kappel-Smith.

amazingly, eleven buttercups. Who would have thought?
45 However hard I tried to make it so, my item was not one
of them. Next page.

I was seventeen when it started. My family was on
vacation, and one day we went on a nature walk led by a

Aha! This looked more like it. Bushy cinquefoil?

young man a few years older than I. Probably I wanted

Nope, leaves not quite right, are they? As the gnats

to get his attention — I’m sure I did — so I pointed at a
flower and asked, ““What’s that?”

descended, I noticed that there were six more pages ahead,
50. each packed with five-petaled yellow flower — St.

Johnsworts, loose-strifes, puccons.

“Hmmm? Oh, just an aster,” he said.

WhyI persisted in carrying it around and consulting

Was there a hint of a sniff as he turned away?

its crowded pages at every opportunity, I have no idea.

There was! It was just an aster and I was just a total
ignoramus!
10

The book was stubborn; well, I was stubborn too, that was
55 part of it. And I had no choice really, not if I wanted to

And I remember the aster. Its rays were a brilliant

get in. A landscape may be handsome in the aggregate,

purple, its core a dense coin of yellow velvet. Its

but this book led to the particulars, and that’s what I

focused light as a crystal will. It faced the sun; it was

wanted. A less complete guide would have been easier to

the sun’s echo.

start with, but more frustrating in the end. A more

Later that day, a book with a green cover lay on the

60 complete book would have been impossible for me to use.
So I persisted in wrestling with the Peterson’s, and thus by

15 arm of a chair under an apple tree. It was the same

slow degrees the crowd of plant stuff in the world became

volume that our guide had carried as he marched us

composed of individuals. As it did, the book changed: its

through the woods. The book had been left there by
itself. It was a thing of power. In the thin summer
shadow of the tree, quivering, like a veil, the book was
20 revealed, and I reached for it.

cover was stained by water and snack food, the spine grew

65 invitingly lax, and some of the margins sprouted cryptic
annotations.

A FIELD GUIDE TO

By the time the next summer came, I had fully

WILD FLOWERS — PETERSON & McKENNY, its

cover said. Its backside was ruled like a measuring

discovered the joy of the hunt, and every new species had

tape, its inside was full of drawings of flowers. By the
end of that week, I had my own copy. I have it still.
25

its trophy date — name and place and date — to be jotted
70 down. If Id found a flower before, I was happy to see it

again. I often addressed it with enthusiasm: Hi there,

Over the next several years, this guide would

Solidago hispida! J discovered early on that a plant’s

become my closest companion, a slice of worldview, as

Latin name is a name of power by which the plant can be

indispensable as eyes or hands. I didn’t arrive at this
intimacy right away, however. This wasn’t going to be

an easy affair for either of us.
30

uniquely identified among different spoke tongues, across

75 continents, and through time. The genus name lashes it
firmly to its closest kin, while its species name describes a

Pll give you an example of how it went. After I’d

personal attribute — rubrum meaning red, officinale

owned the Peterson’s for about a week, I went on a hike

meaning medicinal, odoratus meaning smelly, and so on.

with some friends up a little mountain, taking the book

It all makes such delightful sense!

along. Halfway up the mountains, there by the trailside
was a yellow flower, a nice opportunity to take my new
35 guide for a test drive. “Go on ahead!” I said to my

hiking companions, “I'll be a minute...” Famous last

words.
I had already figured out the business of the book’s
colored tabs. I turned in an authoritative way to the
40 Yellow part and began to flip through. By the time the

80

My friend Julie and I identified individual plants in
our rambles, but from the particulars we began to know
the wholes. Bogs held one community, montane forests
held another, and the plants they held in common were
clues to intricate dreams of climate change and continental

g5 drift. So from plant communities it followed that the
grand schemes of things, when they came our way, arrived
rooted in real place and personal experience: quaternary

last of my friends had disappeared up the trail, ’'d

geology, biogeography, evolutionary biology all lay on the

arrived at a page where things looked right. Five petals?

road that we had begun to travel.

Yes. Pinnate leaves? Whatever. Buttercup? There are,

© PrepPros 2025

87
-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

The passage is best described as being told from the

6.

The passage best supports which of the following

point of view of someone who is:

conclusions about Julie?

A.

F.

tracing her developing interest in identifying

B.

reexamining the event that led her to a lifelong

G.

fascination with asters.

C.

reviewing her relationships with people who
describing how her hobby of identifying

She owns a house that’s close to either a bog or
a montane forest.

H.

have shared her interest in flowers.
D.

She has more experience than the author has in
identifying flowers.

flowers and in the natural world.

She sees value in understanding the various
communities of plants.

J.

flowers became a profitable career.

She stopped using Peterson’s as her primary
source of flower information.

As portrayed by the author, the young man

The author states that the Peterson’s became her

responded to her question about the flower with

closest companion over the period of several:

what is best described as:

“mom

acceptance

A.

days

B.

weeks

surprise

C.

months

condescension

D.

years

anger

In the context of the passage, the author’s statement

What name, if any, does the author report assigning

in lines 56-58 (“A landscape... wanted.) most

to the yellow flower she came across during a

nearly means that she:

mountain hike?

A.

St. Johnswort

B.

Loosestrife

C.

Puccoon

D.

The passage doesn’t name the flower.

F.

learned to understand landscapes by looking at
their overall patterns rather than their details.

G.

found that landscapes lost their appeal the more

H.

hoped to paint attractive portraits of landscapes

J.

sought a deeper knowledge of landscapes

she tried to understand them logically.
by paying careful attention to details.

As it is used in line 56, the phrase get in most nearly

through learning about their individual parts.

means:

“Om

arrive at a physical location.
be chosen for group membership.
truly understand the subject.
be friendly with someone.

The details in lines 63-66 primarily serve to suggest

the:
A.

poor craftsmanship the publishing company

B.

transformation the author’s copy of Peterson’s

used in producing the Peterson’s.

Looking back at her early experiences with the

Peterson’s, the author most strongly implies that the
guide was:
A.

daunting at first, but in retrospect preferable to
either a more or less complete guide.

B.

guide would have been
impossible for her to follow until she started
pairing it with a different guide written for

D.

appealing initially until she realized how poorly

carelessness with which the author used the
Peterson’s, much to her later regret.

10. The author refers to Solidago hispida as an example

of a flower that she:
F.

had great trouble identifying the first time she

G.

hopes to finally come across on one of her

beginners
D.

strange writing the author often encountered in
reading the Peterson’s.

easy to use in the beginning, but more
frustrating in the end than a more complete

C.

underwent as the result of heavy use.
C.

stumbled upon it.

illustrated its crowded pages were.

nature walks.
H.

was pleased to encounter again after she had

J.

feels has an inappropriate name given the

learned to identify it.
plant’s characteristics.

© PrepPros 2025

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

