Chapter 7: How to Approach the Answer Choices
After identifying the question type, finding the primary and secondary keywords, and rephrasing the question

(if necessary), we are ready to go back to the passage, find the Waldo, and answer the question. Part of that
process involves reading the answer choices, so in this chapter we will teach you how to approach the answer
choices most effectively.
After we break down the question like we just learned in Chapter 6, we will use the following steps to answer a

question:
e

Go to the passage and skim for the primary keyword(s).

e

Find the keyword(s) in the passage and use the 2-sentence rule. Look for secondary keyword(s)

e

Find your Waldo.

e

Read the answer choices.

e

Eliminate incorrect answer choices.

e

Find the correct answer choice that is supported by evidence from the passage.

Note that the steps above are not numbered! There is no exact order to go through the steps. The order
that you will go through these steps will depend on the question type, how easily you can find the correct

part of the passage, and your own personal preference. Remember, there is no single right or wrong way to
approach the reading test. Find what works for you! We will discuss how and when to change the order of
those steps in this chapter and later in this course.

When to Read the Answer Choices
After reading the question, should I read the answer choices right away or go back to the passage first?
The answer is it depends on the question type, your reading comprehension skills, and your recall of the

passage. Just like with most of the ACT Reading Test, there is not a 100% right or wrong time to read the
answer choices. That being said, there are some general recommendations we have about when to read the
answer choices right away versus when to go to the passage first.

1.

For “which of the following” questions, read the answer choices right away.

“Which of the following” questions can look like this:

1.

Which of the following statements best describes the author’s view of Grier’s theory on internet
marketing?

Gap,

He believes that Grier’s theory oversimplifies a more complicated topic.
He is unsure if Grier’s theory can ever be proven scientifically.
He is excited by Grier’s findings and finds his theory compelling.
He believes Grier’s theory is problematic but cannot disprove his theory.

Without reading the answer choices, it is impossible to what you are looking for to answer the question. In this
example, we know we are looking for something about “Grier’s theory on internet marketing,” but that is a
very broad topic that could be discussed throughout the passage.
For any “which of the following” questions, read the answer choices before going back to the passage.
Knowing the 4 options before you read the passage makes it easier to find the correct answer or
eliminate incorrect answer choices and usually allows you to answer the question more quickly.

© PrepPros 2025

- 49 -

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

2.

For purpose questions, read the passage first and come up with YOUR answer.

For purpose questions, we recommend going back to the passage, reading for context, and coming up with
your own answer. Once you have your answer, look at the answer choices to see which one best matches

your reasoning. If none of your answer choices match your answer, you may have misunderstood the
passage. Now that you have read the answer choices, go back and reread the portion of the passage to see
which answer choice best matches.

3.

For broad passage questions, try to come up with YOUR own answer first.

After reading the entire passage and answering all other questions, you will likely understand the passage
pretty well, so you can come up with your own answer when asked about the passage as a whole. Once you
have your answer, look at the answer choices to see which one best matches yours.
If you found the passage difficult to understand and cannot come up with your own answer, read the

answer choices right away. Knowing the 4 options can make it easier to go back to the passage and find the
answer choice that matches or to eliminate answer choices that are incorrect.

4.

For clear evidence and inference questions, try both methods below and find what is
better for you.

After you read the question, you can either (1) read the answer choices right away or (2) go back to the passage
first. Let’s go over both methods that you can try for clear evidence and inference questions.

Method #1 — Reading the answer choices right away.
1.

The author indicates that becoming skilled at

2.

using Google can:

It can be inferred whether classical guitarists
approve of playing while standing during a

A. make people uncertain about their health.

concert depends on the:

B.

increase a person’s social network.

A.

skill and popularity of the artist.

C.

undermine a person’s self-confidence.

B.

acoustics and size of the concert venue.

D.

reduce a person’s independent thinking.

C.

number of guitarists playing at the same
time.

D.

age and experience of the guitarist.

This can be helpful because you know the 4 options that you are looking for in the passage before going back
to the passage. As you read, you may come across the Waldo and recognize that it matches an answer choice
you just read. Likewise, you may read evidence and realize it does not quite match what you just read and can
eliminate it as incorrect. Knowing the 4 options before you read can help save time since you can often

recognize the correct answer choice more quickly than if you read for evidence and then read the answer
choices.

In addition, this method can help you save time if you remember the answer right away. Answering
questions based on memory is always somewhat of a risk, but if you are confident that you know the answer, it
can be a great way to improve your speed!
Note that this method does not work if reading the answer choices distracts you from knowing
EXACTLY what the question is asking. This is often why students get lost in the answer choices. Imagine

that you read the question, read all 4 answer choices, and then go back to the passage. Right as you go back to
the passage, I take your test away and ask you “what exactly are you looking for?” If you cannot tell me what
you are looking for, reading the answer choices did not help you; instead, it is hurting your score. Because of
this, some students find it helpful to reread the question again after reading all 4 answer choices to make
sure you know exactly what the question is asking you before you go back to the passage.

© PrepPros 2025

-50-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

Method #2 — Go back to the passage first.
1.

The author indicates that becoming skilled at

2.

using Google can:
A.

approve of playing while standing during a
concert depends on the:

make people uncertain about their health.

B.

increase a person’s social network.

C.

undermine a person’s self-confidence.

D.

reduce a person’s independent thinking.

It can be inferred whether classical guitarists

GaAWpY

skill and popularity of the artist.

acoustics and size of the concert venue.
number of guitarists playing at the same time.

age and experience of the guitarist.

If reading the answer choices distracts you from what the question is asking, go back to the passage first,

look for evidence, and then read the answer choices. Clear evidence and inference questions are usually
quite specific, so you will likely know where in the passage you need to read. By reading before looking at
the answer choices, you are 100% focused on answering the question.

Once you have found what you think may be the Waldo, read the answer choices. Eliminate any incorrect
answer choices and see if you have found the correct evidence. If you have, bubble it in. If not, go back to the
passage and search for evidence that is related to the keywords from the question or the answer choices that
remain.
If you use method #2 and cannot find the evidence for a clear evidence or inference question in the first

20-30 seconds, read the answer choices. The answer choices may trigger your memory of something you
read. If you still cannot find the evidence in the passage, eliminate any answer choices you can, take your best
guess, and move on.

5.

Read the answer choices right away when you do not have primary keywords.

For any vague questions that do not have any primary keywords, read the answer choices right away.

The answer choices may help you identify where in the passage to go or may trigger your memory from
something that you have already read. As an example, if a question asks:
1.

Based on the passage, how did narrator’s personality affect her research?
A.

His talkative, approachable personality was misunderstood as snobbish, so he struggled to

B.

His shy, introspective personality was endearing, but his career suffered because other more

C.

His bold, outspoken personality was off-putting to other scientists, so he did not get the

D.

His easygoing and modest personality made him admired by his peers, who would hesitate

collaborate with other scientists.
outspoken scientists got more attention that he did.
recognition he deserved.

to give him honest feedback.
If this passage discusses the narrator’s personality and research throughout the passage, we have no
primary keywords to skim for. Here, reading the answer choices right away and knowing the 4 options

makes it much easier to (1) eliminate incorrect answer choices and (2) know what to look for as we go
back to the passage.

© PrepPros 2025

-51-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

6.

Let the answer choices help on passages you have trouble understanding.

For any passage that you have trouble understanding, read the answer choices more quickly. If you read a
passage and feel like you just do not know what is going on, let the answer choices help you. For any
questions in a passage you do not understand, read the answer choices right away.

Let’s say you are asked a question about the main idea of a paragraph. After reading the paragraph, you have
no idea what the paragraph is saying. Read the 4 answer choices and then reread the paragraph. Now that you
know the 4 options, you may be able to recognize what the main idea of the paragraph is. The more you
can use the answer choices to help, the more you will understand the passage, and the more questions you will
answer correctly.

**Remember, these are all just suggestions and not rules to follow. There is no right or
wrong way to use the answer choices. Try different methods on practice passages and
practice tests and find what works best for you!

© PrepPros 2025

-52-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

How to Read the Answer Choices Most Effectively
Now that we have discussed when to read the answer choices, let’s go over how to read the answer choices
most effectively to find the correct answer choice as quickly and consistently as possible.

Our Recommended Approach — Work Both Forwards and Backwards
We recommend working forwards (look for evidence in the passage) and backwards (eliminate incorrect
answer choices) at the same time.

Work Forwards — Look for the Evidence in the Passage
Working forwards is looking for the evidence in the passage that matches the correct answer choice. When
working forwards, put your finger on the evidence (the Waldo!) and match it to the correct answer

choice. In an ideal world, you could work forwards and find Waldo all the time but finding the evidence in the
passage that supports the correct answer for every single question is difficult. We do not want to only look for
the correct answer choice.

Work Backwards — Eliminate Incorrect Answer Choices
Working backwards is eliminating incorrect answer choices. Anytime you see an answer choice that is

incorrect for any reason, cross if off. We will cover the 5 types of incorrect answer choices and learn more
about how to effectively spot and eliminate incorrect answer choices in Chapter 8.
For some questions, it is easier to eliminate three answer choices as incorrect than it is to find the
evidence that supports the correct answer. Even if you cannot find evidence in the passage, if you can
eliminate 3 answer choices as incorrect, you have found the correct answer.

How to Work Forwards and Backwards
As you read each answer choice, you should be simultaneously working forward and backwards. Ask yourself
the following questions:
1)

Is there evidence in the passage the matches what this answer choice says?

2)

Is there any specific detail or strong statement in this answer choice that could make it
incorrect?

The first question is working forwards. You will need to go back to the passage to answer this question
properly. If you find Waldo, you will know the correct answer. If there is no evidence from the passage to

support the answer choice, it is incorrect; cross it off.
The second question is working backwards. As you read each answer choice, look for any word(s) that could
make the answer choice incorrect. Be cautious about specific details or strong statements in the answer
choices. In general, stronger and more specific answer choices are usually incorrect because they cannot
be supported by the passage. Oppositely, more boring answer choices are more commonly correct. The
problem is that we like to pick specific answer choices when we are struggling on a question because it is
easier to justify why the specific answer choice could be correct. Boring answer choices are, well, just boring.
Nobody wants to pick the boring answer choices. The writers of the ACT know this and take advantage of it
to make questions more difficult.

* TIP — If you are stuck between two answer choices and cannot find any
evidence to support either one, always pick the less detailed answer choice.
Boring is usually better on the ACT Reading Test!

© PrepPros 2025

-53-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

Chapter 8: Correct vs. Incorrect Answer Choices — How to
Effectively Find the Correct Answer
One of the most important skills in the Reading Test is understanding what makes an answer choice correct or
incorrect. Many students struggle with this when first taking the Reading Test and feel like they are being
asked to somehow find what the ACT says is the “best” answer. This is not the case! There is always 1
correct and 3 incorrect answer choices. The challenge is knowing what makes the correct answer right and
the incorrect answer wrong. You should NOT approach the Reading Test by looking for the best answer.
Instead, we are looking for the 1 correct answer choice or why 3 answer choices are incorrect.
In this chapter, we will teach you how to breakdown each answer choice to identify the difference
between correct and incorrect answer choices.

The 5 Common Types of Incorrect Answer Choices
For success on the Reading Test, you must be able to explain what makes an answer choice incorrect.
Remember, for an answer choice to be correct, it must be supported by evidence in passage and answer

the question being asked. If you can understand not only what makes an answer choice correct but also what
makes the others incorrect, finding the correct answer choice becomes much easier.
The 5 most common types of incorrect answers on the ACT Reading Test are

1)

Not in the Passage

2)

Too Specific

3)

Too Broad

4)

Opposite or Slant of the Passage

5)

In the Passage but Not Answering the Question

In the rest of this chapter, we will go through these 5 types of incorrect answers and some example passages to
teach you how to properly think about the answer choices and more effectively find the correct answer.

© PrepPros 2025

-54-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

1) Not in the Passage
Many incorrect answer choices include information that is not in the passage. If the answer choice includes
details that are not in the passage, the answer is incorrect.

For example, let’s say there is a question about Adam’s clothing from the following passage:
Adam rolled up the tattered sleeves of his sweater, exposing the winding snake tattoos on both of
his forearms. He had gotten them after he returned from his first tour in Iraq — an homage to his fallen
comrades. Despite now living in upstate New York, he still wore his Army boots every day, the tops
of which were hidden below his faded black jeans, the only pair that he owns because, as he says,

“they’re the only ones that fit me just right.”
1.

Based on the passage, which of the following can be assumed about Adam’s clothing?

Gap,

He only wears the most comfortable clothing that he can buy.
The army provided him with free clothes after he returned home from Iraq.
His clothes are old and worn out.

He only owns one sweater.

Here, the only answer that has evidence we can point to in the passage is C. The “tattered sleeves” and “faded
black jeans” both demonstrate that his clothing is old and worn out. All other answer choices are not
supported by evidence from the passage. Could you picture Mr. Johnson’s jeans as the most comfortable that
he could afford? Could he have received free clothing from the Army? Could he own just one sweater? Sure,
all of these are possible, but we do not know any of this for sure from the passage. We cannot point to any
evidence in the passage that supports A, B, or D. We can only tell a story of why we think it could be true. As
we said in Chapter 1, there is no storytelling! If an answer choice is not clearly supported by evidence in the
passage, then it is always wrong! The answer is C.

© PrepPros 2025

-55-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

Passage 1

The best way to describe Ms. Upton is like a

1)

collared shirt that is buttoned all the way up. Sure,

Based on the passage, which of the following can
we infer about Ms. Upton?

that top button might bring about malaise, but it was
well worth it to upkeep her stellar reputation within

A.

Her coworkers hold her in the highest regard.

C.

The community regards her as the best

B.

the community and especially amongst her peers.
How else would everybody know that she is the

She is extremely well dressed.

businesswoman in the town.

best? The only problem was it was all a facade — a

D.

coy attempt to prove her superiority when in reality

She used to attend a book club.

she was just like the rest of us with our top buttons
10

undone. If only she would stop feigning
superiority, maybe we would invite her back to the
book club...maybe.

Passage 2

The term purebred was coined in 1890, but
2)

pure breeding got its start well before that when

Which of the following statements would the

author of the passage most likely support?

people decided to selectively breed dogs of a
certain pedigree to amplify specific traits.

A.

Breeders would selectively mate dogs of certain

produce dogs that are superior in certain ways

health, attributes, and sagacity to produce a new

but inferior in others.

“purer” breed. However, the centuries of closed
breeding have led purebred dogs to have many
of excellence and deleterious genes; this has

The origins of pure breeding began back in the

C.

Modern purebred dogs are far healthier and
have better attributes than their ancestors.

resulted in significant health problems for modern

D.

purebred dogs. As a result, many breeders are now

Cross breeding will successfully fix all of the
problems associated with purebred dogs.

beginning to create new “pure breeds” through
cross breeding (first generation crosses of two
purebred dogs).

© PrepPros 2025

B.

1800s.

problems, as selective breeding favors both genes
10

Pure breeding over a long period of time can

-56-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

2) Too Specific
Incorrect answer choices are very commonly too specific. Often, a single word or a short phrase in an answer
choice makes the entire answer choice incorrect. If the answer choice is too specific and goes beyond what
the passage says, it is always incorrect.
As you read each answer choice, look for specific details and strong statements that could make the

answer choice incorrect. Ask yourself, “Does the passage really say that?” Remember, the more specific and
stronger an answer choice is, the more likely it will be incorrect.
For example, let’s say you are reading a passage about pelicans’ fishing habits:
Pelicans fish by using their long beaks and large throat pouches to scoop up prey from the water’s
surface. Pelicans’ diets include fish, amphibians, small turtles, crabs, and even other small birds.
Most pelicans use a technique called “dive-bombing,” where the birds will tuck their wings and dive
directly into the water at unsuspecting fish. However, pelicans have also been known to hunt
cooperatively, especially when hunting near the shores. The groups of birds will form a line to drive
schools of smaller fish into the shallower waters, beating their wings near the surface, and then
scooping up their favorite prey.
1.

Which of the following statements can be inferred from the passage?

Gap,

Pelicans prey predominantly on fish during the summer months.

Great White pelicans are the only species of pelicans that hunt for turtles.
Small ocean fish are the main prey for pelicans.
Pelicans do the majority of their hunting in shallow waters near the coast.

Here A, B, and D are incorrect because they are too specific. For A, the passage does say that fish are the
predominant prey, but it did not at any point specify anything about summer months. For B, the passage never
discussed Great White pelicans. For D, the passage never details where the pelicans do the majority of their
hunting; it just mentions that pelicans hunt along the shallow waters near the shores. At the end of the passage,

“scooping up their favorite prey” refers to smaller fish as the favorite prey; therefore, the small ocean fish are
the main pray. The answer is C.

© PrepPros 2025

-57-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

On August 25, 1916, President Woodrow

The passage states that the National Park Service

Wilson signed the act creating the National Park

took what role from the Department of the

Service, a new federal bureau in the Department of

Interior in 1916?

the Interior responsible for protecting the 35
national parks and monuments then managed by

A.

and monuments and those yet to be

the department and those yet to be established.
This “Organic Act” states that “the Service thus

established shall promote and regulate the use of
the Federal areas known as national parks,
10

monuments, and reservations... by such means and

established.
B.

which purpose is to conserve the scenery and the

C.

established.
D.

such manner and by such means as will leave them
generations.”
An Executive Order in 1933 transferred 56
20

reservations.
According to the passage, what is one purpose of
the National Park Service?
A.

To conserve national parks and encourage an

national monuments and military sites from the

increase in the number of visitors to the

Forest Service and the War Department to the

parks.

National Park Service. This action was a major

B.

system of parks—a system that includes areas of

C.

historical as well as scenic and scientific
importance. Congress declared in the General

To create a safe haven for wildlife from
hunters and human development.

step in the development of today’s truly national
25

Identify and propose new lands to be

protected as national parks, monuments, or

and to provide for the enjoyment of the same in
unimpaired for the enjoyment of future

Management of 56 national monuments and
military sites and future sites yet to be

natural and historic objects and the wildlife therein
15

Overseeing only the 35 national parks and
monuments established by 1916.

measures as conform to the fundamental purpose
of the said parks, monuments, and reservations,

Protection of the current 35 national parks

To preserve lands in their natural form and
protect lands for future generations.

D.

Authorities Act of 1970 “that the National Park

To protect lands from the damaging practices
of logging and gold mining.

System, which began with the establishment of
30

Yellowstone National Park in 1872, has since

The list of locations in the National Park System

grown to include superlative natural, historic, and

in lines 35-37 serves to:

recreation areas in every region...and that it is the
purpose of this Act to include all such areas in the
System....”
The National Park System of the United States

A.

highlight that one goal of the National Park

B.

point out the locations Congress and the

System is to protect international lands.
President have decided are the most

now comprises more than 400 areas covering more
35

than 84 million acres in 50 states, the District of

Columbia, American Samoa, Guam, Puerto Rico,
Saipan, and the Virgin Islands. These areas are of

such national significance as to justify special

important to protect.

C.

similar systems in other countries.

D.

various acts of Congress.
Additions to the National Park System are
now generally made through acts of Congress, and
national parks can be created only through such

According to the passage, today’s system of
parks:

A.

protects areas that are historically, scenically,

B.

provides an example of a successful national

and scientifically important.

acts. But the President has authority, under
45

the Antiquities Act of 1906, to proclaim national
monuments on lands already under federal
jurisdiction.

show how widespread the lands preserved by
National Park System are today.

recognition and protection in accordance with
40

contrast the US National Park System with

parks system for other countries.
C.

is composed of lands across the country that
Presidents Wilson chose to conserve.

D.

fulfills Woodrow Wilson’s dream of

preserving nature in its original state for
future generations.

© PrepPros 2025

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

3) Too Broad
Sometimes, an answer choice is incorrect because it is too broad. This occurs when the answer choice does not
specifically answer the question being asked (more common) or does not match a more specific statement
made in the passage (less common). While broad answer choices are better in general, make sure that the
answer choice you pick is always specific enough to answer the exact question you are being asked.

For example, let’s consider this excerpt from a passage about Darwin’s finches and evolution.
Dr. Anders Robert became fascinated with evolution after reading Charles Darwin’s Theory of
Evolution in graduate school. But he was never fully satisfied with Darwin’s explanation of evolution

and his survival of the fittest model. Dr. Robert always felt there was another missing piece — a
something that he termed “micro-evolution,” evolution on a tiny scale that can occur over much
shorter time periods. While Darwin’s evolution occurs over many generations due to the pressures of
natural selection, Dr. Robert postulates that every 2 to 3 generations small changes occur to key
characteristics of a population and that over time enough of these small changes lead to new subSpecies and species forming in a shortened time frame. To test his theory, Dr, Robert will travel to the
Galapagos Islands to study changes in the beaks of some of the same species of finches that Darwin
studied over one hundred years ago.
1.

The main idea of the passage is to:

GaAWpY

research the theory of evolution using Darwin’s finches.
test a new idea about evolution by studying finches’ beaks.
highlight Dr. Robert’s lifelong fascination with evolution.

recreate Darwin’s research on the Galapagos Islands.

Here, A is incorrect because it is too broad. For A, does the passage discuss the theory of evolution? Yes, but
researching the theory of evolution is not the main idea of the passage, so A does not answer the question. C is
incorrect because it is too broad and includes a detail that is not supported by the passage. While the first
sentence directly states that Dr. Anders Robert is fascinated with evolution, his fascination is not the main idea
of the passage. Additionally, the passage never states he has a “lifelong fascination,” so C is incorrect. D is
incorrect because the word “recreate” does not match the passage, as there is nothing about Dr. Robert
recreating Darwin’s research. The main idea of the passage is about Dr. Robert’s research to test his new
theory, so B is the correct answer.

© PrepPros 2025

-59-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

The following passage is about honeybees in the United
States.

Honeybees are dying. Decimated by Colony
Collapse Disorder in the mid-2000s, bees remain
under assault from pesticides, climate change,
mites, and habitat destruction. Between 2014 and
2017, about a quarter of bees in the nation’s
commercial colonies died each winter, significantly
higher than the 15% previously considered normal.
This troubling trend, along with the importance of

honeybees to successful crop growth and overall
10

product yield, has led many farmers to rethink how
they will pollinate their crops.

Most people know that honeybees are important
for the pollination of flowers, and therefore

home for the next 10 days, until they are loaded

back onto the trucks in the middle of the night.
Since there is no other way to pollinate so many
flowers, farmers like Terrence will pay beekeepers

55 like Ellis over $5,000 each week for bees. In
addition to helping solve the pollination problem
farmers face due to the recent decline in bee
populations and ongoing issues with mass bee death
events in farmers’ hives, professional beekeepers
60 are also able to help maintain the food yield for

orchards of flowering trees and ensure a bountiful
harvest each year, all while making a good living
for themselves.
1.

essential in the farming of fruits and nuts that grow
15

A.

on flowering trees, but few know that honeybees
decrease in the honeybee population around the
world has created a huge demand for honeybees

B.

explain a largely unknown business.

C.

describe the difficulties that peach farmers
face today.

from farmers, who need the bees to pollinate their

D.

acres and acres of flowering trees. Without bees,

Terrence Jones, an organic Peach farmer in

2.

each of which can produce up to 1,000 flowers that

A.

The reason that honeybee populations have

B.

Professional beekeeping is a large and

C.

Honeybees can travel to multiple farms

been decreasing is still largely unknown.

need to be pollinated. To pollinate the 5 million
flowers on his farm, Terrence needs some serious

growing industry in the United States.

help. He has five hives of his own, but last winter
three of his five hives had mass bee deaths due to
30

Which of the following statements about

honeybees is best supported by the passage?

rural Georgia, has over five thousand Peach trees,
25

Varroa mites — one of the most common parasites

each year to pollinate the flowers of fruit

and a big problem for all beekeepers. The

trees.

D.

remaining bees are not nearly enough to get the
calls up his friend Ellis out in California.
Ellis is a professional beekeeper who keeps 500

beehives. Every year in the spring, Ellis packs up
his hives in specialty bee transport trucks and ships

them all over the country. Based on the size of
Terrence’s farm and the number of flowers that
40

need to be pollinated, Ellis is bringing ten hives to
Terrence’s farm. This will be these bees’ second

stop — they, along with 55 other hives, already
helped another farmer in Pennsylvania pollinate his
700 acres of early-blooming apple trees. After
45

arriving, the bees are carefully transported to the

peach fields in the middle of the night, when the
bees are all asleep in the hives. Shortly after
sunrise, there is an audible buzzing in the orchard,
where the bees are visiting thousands of blossoms
50

on the peach trees to harvest the nectar, pollinating
the flowers as they go. This will be the bees’ new

© PrepPros 2025

Honeybees are essential to produce all
types of fruits and nuts.

massive job done. So, what does Terrence do? He
35

explore the historical relationship between

bees and farming in the United States.

crops like apples, peaches, cranberries, and
almonds, just to mention a few, would fail.

describe one man’s quest to become a
professional beekeeper.

can be big business. The recent and alarming

20

The primary purpose of the passage is to:

3.

The first paragraph serves to:

A.

propose a solution to a challenge that is
introduced later in the passage.

B.

identify an issue that motivates the solution

C.

provide an example of a phenomena that is

discussed later in the passage.
explained later in the passage.
D.

explain the factors that led to a damaging

trend discussed in the rest of the passage.

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

4.

According to the passage, honeybees are

7.

essential for:
A.

about the location of Ellis’s beehives that are
not at Terrence’s farm?

vegetable farms that do not have any
beehives of their own.

B.

C.
D.

Based on the passage, what can be inferred

A.

any type of farm that does not have enough

The beehives are at other farms at
unspecified locations across the United

local bees to pollinate the flowers.

States.

farms that have decreased food yield due to

The beehives are at other peach farms in

pests and parasites.

Georgia.

fruits and nuts that grow on flowering trees.

The beehives are at the apple orchards in
Pennsylvania since apple trees take longer

5.

to pollinate.

The passage indicates that Ellis is bringing how

The location of the beehives is a secret that

many hives to Terrence’s farm?

Gap,
6.

Ellis refuses to share.

10

8.

55

500

The passages states that the pollination problem
farmers face is a result of:

The passage does not specify.

A.

declining bee populations and mass bee

death events in farmers’ hives.

It can most reasonably be inferred that the size

B.

Varroa mites and bacterial infections in the

of Terrence’s farm compared to the apple famer

farmers’ hives.

in Pennsylvania is:

bee’s having lowered pollination activity

A.

slightly larger.

B.

