Chapter 5: How to Spot and Approach the 7 Most
Common Types of Questions
Knowing the type of question that you are being asked to answer is a critical skill to maximize your Reading
score. In this chapter, we will teach you the 7 most common types of questions on the ACT, how to spot each
type on the test, and the best methods for approaching each one.
ACT Reading questions can be broken into 7 types of questions:
1)

Broad Passage

2)

Clear Evidence

3)

Inference

4)

Purpose

5)

Main Idea

6)

Words in Context

7)

Comparing Passages

These categories cover 95+% of questions on the ACT, but there can still be some other miscellaneous

question types. If you see a question that does not fall into one of these categories, read the question carefully
and use the principles that you learn during this course to find the correct answer.
Now, let’s learn how to spot and approach each type of question.

1) Broad Passage Questions
Broad passage questions are often the first question (and sometimes the first 2 questions) in a passage. Some
common broad passage questions are:
The passage can be best described as
The main idea of the passage is
The main purpose of the passage is to

The author’s central claim is
The passage is written from the point of view of
A central theme of the passage is

Which choice best describes the narrator?
Which choice best describes the overall structure of the passage?
This list includes some of the most common types of broad passage questions, but there can be many more. In
general, it will be easy to tell when a question is a broad passage question.
Remember, we recommend skipping broad passage questions and answering them last. After completing
the rest of the questions, you will understand the passage better and are more likely to answer broad passage
questions correctly. You will also save time since it will be easier to answer the question(s) more quickly.

© PrepPros 2025

-29-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

2) Clear Evidence Questions
For clear evidence questions, the correct answer is a restatement or rephrasing of evidence directly stated
in the passage. Once you find your Waldo, the correct answer will most commonly be “slap-you-in-theface” obvious. In other words, the correct answer is the exact same words from the passage or a simple
rephrasing of the evidence in the passage.

Clear evidence questions almost always have at least one of the following keywords in the question:
Indicates

States
Argues
Describes

Claims
According to the passage(s)/author/narrator
Based on the passage(s)
In the passage(s)

Other less common clear evidence keywords that have appeared on the ACT before are below:
e

Characterizes

e

Clarifies

e

As presented in the passage(s)

Clear evidence questions can look like this:
1.

The passage indicates that the best

2.

Based on the passage, which choice best

methodology for increasing plant growth

describes what happened when the molten

is to

glass mixture was cooled too quickly?

Whenever we spot a clear evidence question, we know that we are looking for clear evidence in the passage.
Do not make any inferences when answering the question! This is one of the most common mistakes that

students make.
Clear evidence questions usually are easier because the evidence directly matches the correct answer.
However, clear evidence questions can still be challenging when the evidence is well hidden in the passage, so
make sure to still guess and move on to the next question if you get stuck and cannot find the evidence.

© PrepPros 2025

-30-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

3) Inference Questions
For inference questions, the correct answer is most commonly not directly stated in the passage. Instead,
the correct answer is demonstrated in the passage. There is still strong evidence from the passage to
support the correct answer, but the evidence is not going to directly match the answer choice.

Once you find your Waldo, the answer choice is still generally pretty clear, but it is not going to be as obvious
as with the clear evidence questions that we just discussed.
Inference questions always have at least one of the following keywords in the question:
Inferred

Implies

Suggests
Assumed
Most reasonably

Most likely
Most clearly
Most nearly
Most strongly
Best supports

As an example, consider the following passage and questions:

His mother, standing across the room, smiled warmly at Elijah. His grandfather, a man
known for his short temper and intimidating appearance, knelt and reached out his hand.

1.

Inthe passage, the actions of Elijah’s mother suggest that she
A.

wishes to support Eliyjah’s interaction with his grandfather.

Notice that passage never directly states that Eliyjah’s mother supports the interaction with the grandfather, but
the “smiling warmly” at this interaction demonstrates her support. This is the type of evidence we can see for
inference questions.

Inference questions are generally more difficult because you must select an answer choice that is
demonstrated but not directly stated in the passage. Remember that there still needs to be evidence (and
usually strong evidence) from the passage to support the correct answer. You cannot tell too much of a
story as to why the answer is correct; you still need to find your Waldo!

Once you find the evidence in the passage, make sure you read for enough context and use the 2-sentence
rule! This is always important on the ACT Reading and especially true for inference questions.

© PrepPros 2024

-3]-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

4) Purpose Questions
Purpose questions ask us to think about WHYa sentence, quotation, or paragraph is included in the
passage.

Purpose questions always have at least one of the following keywords in the question:
Purpose

Serve(s) to
In order to

Mainly to

Function
Primarily to

Purpose questions can look like this:
1.

The author includes the quotation in the

2.

third paragraph in order to

Inthe first paragraph, the references to the
Hulk and Ironman primarily serve to

To answer purpose questions correctly, we must read for context and think about WHY the information is
included in the passage. If you read just the lines or the paragraph in the question, you will likely not have
the context that you need to answer the question correctly.

5) Main Idea Questions
Main idea questions ask us to figure out WHATa portion of the passage or paragraph is saying. The
correct answer to a main idea question summarizes the part of the passage the question is asking about.
Main idea questions most commonly have the following keywords in the question:
Main idea

Best summarizes
Central claim
Paraphrases

Main idea questions can look like this:
1.

Which of the following best summarizes

2.

the author’s justification for the British

The main idea of the fifth paragraph
(lines 60-73) is

rule over India?
For main idea questions, focus on the part of the passage the question is asking you to consider and
summarize what is being said. You should still read for a little bit of context (this is always good practice on
the ACT), but the context for main idea questions is not as important.

© PrepPros 2025

-32-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

6) Words in Context Questions
Words in context questions ask us to select what a word or phrase most nearly means in the context of

the passage. Usually, we are being asked about the meaning of a word or phrase that is being used in an
uncommon way in the passage, so we must go back and read the context to find what it means. Most often, the
correct answer is not the actual definition of the word but an alternate meaning based on the context.
Words in context questions always have the phrase “most nearly means” and look like this:
1.

As used in line 61, “audible” most nearly means
A.

Noisy

B.

Detectable

C.

Noticeable

D.

Clear

To find the correct answer, you must read for context. We recommend that you read the sentence

before, the sentence the word or phrase is included in, and the following sentence. If it is still not clear
what the word or phrase should mean, read for more context earlier and later in the paragraph.

How to Approach Words in Context Questions
There are two approaches that are effective for words in context questions.
Method #1: Pick Your Own Word
1.

Read for context.

2.

Pick your own word to replace the word.

3.

Look at the answer choices and pick the word that best matches your word.

Method #2: Plug the Answer Choices Back into the Passage
1.

Read each answer choice back in the passage. Make sure to read for context.

2.

Pick the answer choice that best replaces the word.

Both approaches are equally effective so which one you use is a matter of preference.

TIP — Do Not Assume the Hard Vocabulary Word is Correct
Words in context questions are one place the ACT commonly tests vocabulary knowledge. If you see any
word(s) that you do not know in a words in context question, do not assume the hard word is correct.

Many students mistakenly think, “Oh, this is the ACT...it must be the hard word since they are testing my
vocabulary.” Wrong! Sometimes, the ACT is testing your vocabulary and the hard word is correct. Other
times, the hard word is just a decoy and a simpler word that you know fits correctly.
On these questions, do the best you can with the words you know. If there is a word you know and it
works, pick that word. If you know a word and it does not work, cross if off. If you are stuck between two
words the you do not know, bubble in your best guess and move on.

© PrepPros 2025

- 33-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

7) Comparing Passages Questions
At the end of the dual text passage, there are 3 comparing passages questions. These questions ask us to
compare the dual text passages in a variety of ways, including many of the question types we have covered
already in this chapter. In general, you should approach comparing passages questions with the same
methods that we will learn for the questions in a normal passage.

These questions are easy to spot because the question will clearly indicate that you are using both passages
by referencing the passages or the authors of the passages.

Comparing passages questions can look like this:
1.

Which choice best describes the

2.

relationship between the two passages?

One similarity between passage A and
passage B is that both passages argue

In chapter 10 of this course, we will give some more advanced tips for how to best handle comparing passages
questions.

© PrepPros 2025

-34-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

