Chapter 4: Pacing and 10 Time Management Skills
Proper time management is critical to success on the Reading Test. The Reading Test is the section on the
ACT that students most commonly struggle finishing. It is important that you not only know your pacing but
also learn some skills and tips to improve your time management skills.

Pacing
The ACT Reading Test is composed of 4 passages you must complete in 40 minutes (60 minutes for extended
time). On average, you have 10 minutes per passage. For extended time, you get 15 minutes per passage.
Memorize the pace and the breakdowns below to help you keep pace on test day.

1

10

1

15

2

20

2

30

3

30

3

45

4

40

4

60

These timing breakdowns are general estimates and should not be treated strictly. You are not going to
complete every passage in the same amount of time. Some passages will take you longer than the average
while you may complete others more quickly. That being said, you should never get more than 1-2 minutes
behind the pace breakdown in the tables above.
At the end of each passage, check your watch. If you are on pace or ahead of pace, keep working as you
have been. If you are behind pace, take note of that and pick up the pace. Try to avoid freaking out and
rushing too much, as that is when students commonly miss lots of questions.

10 Time Management Skills
To score your best, you want to make sure that you finish all 4 passages. What follows are 10 skills that will
help you learn to manage your time more effectively on the ACT Reading Test.

1)

Know Your Order

You do not need to complete the passages in the order that they are presented on the ACT. We recommend
completing your favorite passage(s) first and saving your least favorite passage for last. There are no
passages that are necessarily easier or harder, but there may be passages that feel easier or harder to you. The
ACT passages appear in the following order:
New Enhanced ACT

Old ACT

Passage 1 — Literary Narrative

Passage 1 — Literary Narrative

Passage 2 — Informational

Passage 2 — Social Science

Passage 3 — Informational

Passage 3 — Humanities

Passage 4 — Informational

Passage 4 — Natural Science

We do not know if the new ACT will follow the same order as the old ACT, but we expect you will still see
the same 4 types of passages. As you complete practice ACTs, keep in mind what passage(s) you like and
what passage(s) you find more challenging. Even if the passages are not in order, you should be able to

© PrepPros 2025

-25-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

identify the type of passage based on the quick description at the very top of each passage. With practice, you
can come up with your own order to use on test day. In case you run out of time or need to rush to finish the
final passage, it is better to run out of time on a passage that you find more challenging rather than a
passage that is typically easier for you.

2)

Skip Broad Passage Questions

The first question (and sometimes the first 2 questions) in the passage often asks about the passage as a whole.
You should always skip broad passage question(s) and answer them last. After answering the rest of the
questions in the passage, you will understand the passage better, and, therefore, will be more likely to answer
the broad passage questions correctly.
This is also a time-saving tip because you can answer these questions more quickly after answering all
other questions in the passage. By placing these questions first, the ACT is trying to trick you into
answering these questions first, which can be very time consuming since most students need to go back and reread or skim the passage. In addition to wasting time, you are also more likely to get broad passage questions
wrong if you answer them first.

3)

Get to Know the Pace

Knowing how much time you have per passage is not good enough. It is important to really get to know the
pace, so you can tell when you are on pace, ahead or pace, or behind pace without having to constantly

check your watch. Once you know the pace, you will have an internal voice in your head tell you when you
have more time on a question or when you need to move on. The only way to accomplish this is practice,
practice, practice!

4)

Follow The 30-Second Rule. Do Not Get Stuck

One of the most common mistakes students make is getting stuck on a question for too long. If you get stuck
on a question for more than 30 seconds, bubble in your best guess and move on. It is far better to take
your best guess on any question(s) that give you trouble and finish the Reading Test than it is to run out of time
and completely guess on a bunch of questions as time 1s running out. If you have time after answering the
rest of the questions in the passage or find the evidence as you answer the rest of the questions in the
passage, you can come back to the question and change your answer.

5)

Circle Guesses, Box Non-Confident Answers

What should you do if you cannot find the Waldo and need to move on? Or if you run out of time on a
passage and move to the next passage? If you completely guess on a question, circle the question number.
You may also have to answer some questions before you are 100% sure that you have found the correct answer
and the evidence in the passage. It is important to not get stuck on a question for too long when you cannot
find the “Waldo” or are picking between two answer choices. If you answer a question but are not
confident in your answer, box the number. It is better to make some educated guesses along the way and
finish the test than get stuck and not finish the final passage.
If you finish the Reading Test with time left, go back to any questions where you circled the number.

After answering those questions, if you still have time left, go back to any questions where you boxed the
number.

The goal is that with practice you will have a sense of when you have time to stick with a question and when
you need to move on. Again, the only way to get this sense is with practice!

© PrepPros 2025

-26-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

6)

Answer Questions Out of Order

You do not need to answer the questions in the order that they are presented on the test. In fact, you probably
should not always answer the questions in order! Instead, be open to answering the questions out of order.
For some students, it is best to start with questions with line references and other questions that you can
find quickly. If you cannot find the right part of the passage quickly for a question, skip the question and

come back to it. As you go back to the passage for other questions, you may come across the evidence in the
passage that you could not find and can go back and answer the question you skipped.
Remember, the questions on the ACT Reading are not strictly chronological, so the questions are not in the
order of where the evidence appears in the passage.

7)

Know Where Waldo Is More Likely Going to Be Based on the Question Number

The 9 questions in each passage are not chronological, but there is a rough pattern that might help you find the
evidence more quickly. If you read a question and do not remember where it 1s, start looking in the parts of the
passage listed below:
Questions 1-3: Start of the passage, most likely in the first third of the passage.
*Note: This does not count broad passage questions.

Questions 4-7: Could be anywhere but start looking somewhere in the middle of the passage.
Questions 8-9: End of the passage, most likely in the last 2 paragraph.
These are rough guidelines and absolutely NOT RULES! These are just the locations where the Waldo

is most likely going to be. Sometimes, the Waldo for question 8 is in the middle of passage, and sometimes
the Waldo for question 6 is in the very first sentence. So, if you do not find your evidence, keep looking
elsewhere in the passage. Knowing where the evidence is most likely going to be is just a method to use to
save time.
Now, let’s look at this example passage to demonstrate how to use Tips #6 and #7:

3 Di
3

3 Ds
3

Passage Il

11. The main point of the second paragraph (lines 21-36) is
that

INFORMATIONAL: This passage is from the book The Botany
of Desire: A Plant's-Eye View of the World by Michael Pollan.

What the Dutch could not have known was that a
55 virus was responsible for the magic of the broken tulip,
a fact that, as soon as it was discovered, doomed the
beauty it had made possible. The color of a tulip actu-

ally consists of two pigments working in concert—a

Originally cultivated in the Ottoman Empire, tulips were introluced to Europe at the end of the sixteenth century and
became wildly popular in the seventeenth century.

base color thatis always yellow or white and a second,

magic flower because it was prone to spontaneous and

two hues determines the unitary color we see. The virus
works by partially and irregularly suppressing the
lying color to show through. It wasn’t until the 1920s,
65 after the invention of the electron microscope, that sci-

entists ereeaiey the virus was being spread from tulip

tulips, one of them might be so possessed, opening to

Peach

reveal the white or yellow ground of its petals painted,
as if by the finest brush and steadiest hand, with intri-

cate feathers or flames of a vividly contrasting hue.
the

tulip was said

to have

“broken,” and if a tulip broke in a particularly striking
manner—if the flames of the applied color reached

clear to the petal’s lip, say, and its pigment was bril-

liant and pure and its pattern symmetrical—the owner

15 of that bulb had won the lottery. For the offsets of that

ulb would inherit its pattern and hues and command a

fantastic price. The fact that broken tulips for some

unknown reason produced fewer and smaller offsets
than ordinary tulips drove their prices

still

higher.

20 Semper Augustus was the most famous such break.
group

The closest we have to a broken tulip today is the
known as the Rembrandts—so named because

Rembrandt painted some of the most admired breaks of

25 patterning of one or more contrasting colors, Took
his time. But these latter-day

tulips, with their heav

clumsy by comparison, as if painted in haste with a

thick brush. To judge from the paintings we have of the
originals, the petals of broken tulips could be as fine

and intricate as marbleized papers, the
30 swirls of color somehow managing to seem both bold
and delicate at once. In the most striking examples—
such as the fiery carmine that Semper Augustus
splashed on its pure white ground—the outbreak of
color juxtaposed with the orderly, linear form of the
35 tulip could be breathtaking, with the leaping, wayward
patterns just barely contained by the petal’s edge.

C.

anthocyanin, thereby allowing a portion of the under-

5 brilliant eruptions of color. In a planting of a hundred

10 When this happened,

B.

60 laid-on color called an anthocyanin; the mix of these

One crucial element of the beauty of the tulip that
intoxicated the Dutch, the Turks, the French, and the
inglish has been lost to us. To them the tulip was a

A.

y

Myzus persicae, Oi Peac! Ponte aphi

Peach trees were a common feature of seventeenthcentury gardens.
70

By the 1920s the Dutch regarded their tulips as

commodities to trade rather than jewels to display, and
since the virus weakened the bulbs it infected (the

reason the offsets of broken tulips were so small and

few in number), Dutch growers set about ridding their

75 fields of the infection. Color

famous tulip breaks of his
ti

12. It can reasonably be inferred from the passage that some

seventeenth-century tulip growers believed tulip breaks
were mainly caused by:
suppliers’ storage conditions.

J.

certain weather patterns.

G.
H.

borrowing

their

techniques

50 metals into gold reliably

seventeenth- century’ Holland: the wayward color loosed

85 the virus responsible set about destroying it.
on a tulip

by a good

break

perfected

the

flower, even as

On its face the story of the virus and the tulip
would seem to throw a wrench into any evolutionary
of beauty.
Excerpt from THE BOTANY OF DESIRE: A PLANT'S-EYE VIEW OF
THE WORLD by Michael Pollan, copyright © 2001 by Michael Pollan.

C.

good

break,

inspiring

failed, now and then the

everybody

efforts.

© PrepPros 2025

to

redouble

their

oo,

.

of the passage in that
G.
.

==
+

-_ eS . The main purpose of the passage is to:
highlight changesin the flower industry from the
seventeenth century through today.

G. examine the way certain plants have been represehrin art over the centuries.

J.

an increase in prices for broken tulips.

D.

were

a desire among growers to plant a wider variety of
crops.

16. In the passage, the author compares broken tulips as

they are represented in Rembrandt's paintings to:

F
h-tree bl
ra peach- awd S sprinkl don

th

4

3. paint pow Crs sprink’e on the ground.
intricately marbleized papers.

.

.

17. The passage author most likely mentions that peach
trees were a staple of seventeenth-century gardens to:

A. highlight a crop favored by growers who did not
cultivate tulips.

B. emphasize that peach trees are not as popular in
gardens today.

C. explain how peach potato aphids spread the tulip
virus.
D. compare tulips to another popular seventeenthcentury crop

F. aeons, whet the views that caused broken 18. As it is used in line 80, the word abandon most nearly

Used by permission of Random House, an imprint and division of Pen-

H.

argue that yellow and white are the only natural

14. The sixth paragraph (lines 79-85) differs from the rest

guin Random House LLC. All rights reserves

co) .

occurs.

tulip colors.
D. indicate why broken tulips contain no anthocyanin.

from

would-be tulip changers would be rewarded with a

oo.

A. describe the range of potential tulip colors.

Anna Pavord recounts the extraordinary lengths to

sometimes

.

B. explain how the color variation in a broken tulip

I can’t help thinking that the virus was supplying
80 something the tulip needed, just the touch of abandon
the flower’s chilly formality called for. Maybe that's
why the broken tulip became such a treasure in

a decreasein the demand for broken tulips.
a fear among growers that broken tulips
diseased.

C.

J.

manifestation of natural beauty abruptly lost its claim

on human affection.

A.
B.

H. apainting hastily done with
a thick brush.

diseased tulip bulbs. —
certain growing techniques.

13. The information in lines 57—64 primarily functions to:

40 alchemists, who faced what must have seemed a com-

parable challenge. Over the earth above a bed planted
with white tulips, gardeners would liberally sprinkle
paint powders of the desired hue, on the theory that
rainwater would wash the color down to the roots,
45 where it would be taken up by the bulb. Charlatans sold
recipes believed to produce the magic color breaks;
pigeon droppings were thought to be an effective agent,
as was plaster dust taken from the walls of old houses.
Unlike the alchemists, whose attempts to change base

we

F.

breaks, when they di

occur, were promptly destroyed, and a certain peculiar

15. According to the passage, in the seventeenth century,
the fact that broken tulip bulbs tended to produce
fewer and smaller offsets compared to typical tulip
bulbs resulted in:

D. Rembrandt was responsible ffor painting the most

which Dutch growers would go to make their tulips

break,

modern Rembrandt tulips have been painted by
many of today’s most famous artists.
compared to seventeenth-century broken tulips,
today’s multicolored tulips are less visually
appealing.
the tulip break known as Semper Augustus was a
striking example of the seventeenth-century broken
tulip.

vide an overview of plant viruses and the way

they affect the flower market.

explain a particular flower variation and how it
has been perceived historically.

-27-

i

aus

argues that growers should have dealt with broken

tulips differently.
challenges the idea that broken tulips were
beautiful.
presents a personal meditation on broken tulips.

means

F.
G.
H.

uninhibitedness.
relinquishment.
retreat.

J.

denial.

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

8) Wear a Watch and Check Your Watch After Each Passage
Wear a watch on test day. You cannot bring a smart watch, and your watch cannot make noise.
We know this is a repeat from earlier in this chapter, but we will say it again for emphasis: check your watch
at the end of each passage. A quick watch check along with memorizing the timing breakdown at the start of
this chapter tells you if you are ahead of pace, right on pace, or behind pace. You can then adjust accordingly
to make sure you finish all 4 passages.

9)

Do Not Freak Out If You Fall Behind the Pace

This is a very important one! If you check your watch and see that you are behind the pace, do not freak
out! In this situation, most students panic, start to rush, read the next passage as quickly as possible, and
answer questions too quickly, which usually leads to a bunch of incorrect answers. The other major mistake 1s
focusing so much on the time that you can no longer retain what you are reading. Do not let this be you!
When you notice that you are behind the pace, make minor adjustments to your approach. Try to read a little
bit more quickly but do not read so fast that you cannot understand what you are reading. This will help
you catch up a little bit.
More importantly, make quicker decisions when answering the questions. If you read a question and the

answer choices and think you know the answer right away, bubble in that answer and move on. It is okay to
answer questions from memory if you are confident that you know the right answer. For other questions,
you may have to select an answer before you are 100% sure of your answer. That is okay. Some 50-75% sure
answers and finishing all the questions is still better than having to guess on a bunch of questions at the end.

10)

Know When to Go with Your Gut

For our final skill, you should (1) know how confident you need to be to accurately pick the correct
answer and (2) know if you can answer the question from memory or if you need to go back to the

passage. Students who have strong recall can rely on their memory to know what is right vs. wrong. If you
know the answer right away, bubble it in and move on without going back to the passage. If you think you
know the answer but are not 100% confident, go back to the passage and double-check to make sure you get
the answer correct. If you know that you do not remember where the details are in the passage, either go back
to the passage and look for the Waldo or skip the question and come back to it later.
Knowing when to trust your gut versus when you need to go back to the passage is a very powerful skills to
help manage your time correctly.

Common Test Day Mistake To Avoid
With practice, you will know when to go with your gut and answer a question right away, when you to
back to the passage and look for the evidence, and when to skip the question and answer it later.

Knowing when to trust your gut and when to go back to the passage is an essential skill to build.
Many students stop trusting their gut on test day and start finding the “Waldo” every time. If you do
this, you will suddenly have timing issues on the real ACT when you are normally finishing the Reading
Test on your practice tests.

© PrepPros 2025

-28-

PrepPros ACT Reading Course

