Practice ACT #4

Instructions:
Please print off this practice ACT if you can to simulate test-day conditions and be sure to follow the self-timing guidelines strictly. Do NOT give yourself a few extra minutes to finish any sections of the test. If you run out of time, guess just like you would on test day.

You can find the self-timing sheets in the "Welcome To The Ultimate ACT Course" Course in the lecture titled "Download Practice ACTs + How To Best Use Them." If you are approved for extended time, use the extended timing sheets. Otherwise, use normal time.

Ideally, it is best to take your practice tests in the morning at 8:30am to simulate test day (you will arrive at 8:00am on test day, but you will most likely not actually start the test until closer to 8:30). Take the practice test in a quiet environment without interruptions.

Scoring:
Once you have completed this practice ACT, you can use the answer key at the back of this test to score your answers. You can then use the scoring table at the back to find your scores. You will get a score 1-36 for each section (English, Math, Reading, Science). Your composite score is an average of your 4 section scores rounded to the nearest whole number.

ENGLISH TEST
45 Minutes—75 Questions

DIRECTIONS: In the five passages that follow, certain words and phrases are underlined and numbered. In the right-hand column, you will find alternatives for the underlined part. In most cases, you are to choose the one that best expresses the idea, makes the statement appropriate for standard written English, or is worded most consistently with the style and tone of the passage as a whole. If you think the original version is best, choose "NO CHANGE." In some cases, you will find in the right-hand column a question about the underlined part. You are to choose the best answer to the question.

You will also find questions about a section of the passage, or about the passage as a whole. These questions do not refer to an underlined portion of the passage, but rather are identified by a number or numbers in a box.

For each question, choose the alternative you consider best and fill in the corresponding oval on your answer document. Read each passage through once before you begin to answer the questions that accompany it. For many of the questions, you must read several sentences beyond the question to determine the answer. Be sure that you have read far enough ahead each time you choose an alternative.

PASSAGE I
Dragon and Snow

Yueming zipped up her warmest coat for the walk home from school and pushed through the double doors. No new snow had fallen since the weekend, when back-to-back snowy blizzards had turned Philadelphia into a place she did not recognize, the view out her apartment window at the time more amazing with each passing hour.

The New Year's festivities, fifteen days of it, were half over and still her family had not arrived from China, delayed by the storms.

The cold air snapped Yueming out of an afternoon daze. At the corner of Tenth and Winter, someone had cleared the snow in front of the mural, one of the several that were part of Yueming's daily commute. This one The History of Chinatown, looked especially bright today, the sun's reflection off the snow, working some magic with the colors.

There, in paint, Chinese immigrants worked their jobs, one bent over a clothes iron, others caught up in railroad construction, and a giant figure on the horizon, his gaze locked on the passerby. In the lower left-hand corner, a child no bigger than Wei tugged at a kite in a schoolyard.

As many times as she had seen them, these figures still caught Yueming off guard, incongruous as they were—motionless—with the rush of Philadelphia's urban city traffic heading for the Vine Street Expressway.

Mother and Wei would come tomorrow after this visit, their next one would be for Yueming's graduation. [A] Having to tell them soon, tomorrow, over her decision to stay, that she would not be coming home to China. [B] She would remain instead in this world, familiar and new. [C] Suddenly, laughter turned the corner in her direction. It belonged to a small group of young men, each carrying a piece of a giant dragon. [D] She would see the toothy, quaking creature in all it's festive entirety the following evening with her family. But now, Yueming hesitated under the arch that opened into Chinatown. As the traffic light changed and changed again, she watched the distance grow between herself and the undone dragon, color bobbing on a cityscape of snow.

[English questions 1-15 would continue here with answer choices A, B, C, D for each question]

PASSAGE II
Aquatic Explorer AQUA2

[The following paragraphs may or may not be in the most logical order. Each paragraph is numbered in brackets, and question 30 will ask you to choose where Paragraph 3 should most logically be placed.]

[1]
Marine dives offer scientists invaluable chances to study sea life firsthand. Yet the limited time divers may remain underwater—often no more than two hours—has led scientists to call for robots able to help conduct observations in an assistive capacity. Complex functions like detecting chemicals and mapping topography, and these have already been implemented in robots with wide success. The bigger challenge is teaching a robot to swim.

[2]
Powerful thrusters have helped some robots surge through the depths. Such equipment, however can alarm or even harm sea life. The engineers developing the robot AQUA2 imagined a robot able to use advanced imaging and electromechanical systems. To do so, it would need to swim as naturally as a fish, a squid, or—as it turned out—a turtle.

[3]
AQUA2 has also proved remarkably well adapted to land. Its flippers reverse direction in shallow water, pushing the robot up onto sturdy, arched legs. The legs propel the robot out of the surf. Rubber treads on each leg allow AQUA2 to scale sand dunes or snowbanks, making the robot as suitable for studies in the Caribbean as well as those in the Arctic.

[4]
Like its biological counterpart, AQUA2 has flippers that allow it to glide through the water, dive to the ocean floor, and ascend from the bottom. Unlike thruster-powered robots, AQUA2 can make subtle changes in course simply by altering the positions of its flippers. By holding two flippers still, as it gently paddles, with the other four, for example, the robot can "hover" in place underwater. This exquisite competency will allow it to avoid disturbing the sea life it is designed to observe.

[5]
Now, AQUA2 faces a new challenge; even more tricky than reacting to different terrains is interacting with human divers. During field tests amid busy coral reefs in Barbados and the silty beds of lakes in Canada, AQUA2 practices following divers' instructions. Soon, scientists may be able to conduct more frequent, more efficient dives with robotic partners at their sides.

[English questions 16-30 would continue here with answer choices F, G, H, J for each question]

PASSAGE III
The Fisherman of Porgy Key

[1]
Covering 173,000 acres of clear water and dozens of islands off the tip of Florida, Biscayne National Park features many unusual species of plants. Today, the park is a refuge for sea turtles, manatees, and alligators. In the 1960s, though, land developers saw commercial potential for the area. Some wanted to build an oil refinery. [A]

Others, because of Biscayne Bay's natural beauty, wanted beach resorts. However, Lancelot Jones, one of two year-round residents, of the islands wanted to preserve the bay.

[2]
Porgy Key had always been home for Jones, a small island in Biscayne Bay. His father had purchased the land for $300 in 1897, and Jones grew up there, cultivating pineapples and Key limes. Therefore, in 1935, Jones began guiding fishing trips; his knowledge of fishing earned him the reputation for being the area's best fishing guide. [B] Among his clientele were several US presidents, including: Hoover, Kennedy, and Nixon.

[3]
[1] In 1961, fourteen of the eighteen landowners came to Biscayne Bay and voted to found a city on the bay's islands to expedite commercial development of the land. [2] Jones abstained from voting. [3] He refused to sell his land because he wanted the area to be conserved.

[4]
Jones wasn't alone, some Florida residents, and frequent visitors sought to preserve Biscayne Bay by turning it into a national park. Their efforts were furthered by Miami Herald reporter Juanita Greene, whose articles helped sway public opinion. [C] Finally, in 1968, President Johnson signed a bill that put the bay under federal protection.

[5]
First to sell their land to the National Park Service was Lancelot Jones, who was permitted to remain on Porgy Key. Since he still led fishing trips, and he taught schoolchildren about the environment of Biscayne Bay. [D] In exchange for teaching each class, he asked only for a Key lime pie in return for the class. Jones lived alone, but he said, "When you have plenty of interests, like the water and the woods, the birds and the fish, you don't get lonely."

[English questions 31-45 would continue here with answer choices A, B, C, D for each question]

PASSAGE IV
Close Encounters of the Bird Kind

In June of 1995, due to NASA technicians inspecting the space shuttle Discovery for an upcoming launch found over two hundred punctures in a fuel tank. Video surveillance revealed the culprits; two northern flickers, a species of woodpecker, was attempting to excavate a nest in the fuel tank's foam insulation. Upon striking the solid metal beneath, the flickers would stubbornly choose a new spot and try again.

[1] In the northern United States, where most flickers return each summer to mate and raise broods, the birds' persistence is well known. [2] By lacking a distinct song, flickers drum their beaks against hard surfaces to announce themselves to mates. [3] The louder the noise an object makes, the more attractive it is to flickers. [4] Among their favorite noisemakers are drainpipes, TV antennas, and even farm equipment. [5] At the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, though the flickers' persistence seemed mysterious. [6] Worse, it posed a serious risk.

[7] For solid metal to stop the birds from trying to nest at the launch site, how could NASA prevent damage to its equipment and keep the species safe?

NASA put together a committee, dubbed the Bird Investigation Review and Deterrent (BIRD) team, to consult with wildlife experts. After learning that flickers seek out soft, rotted wood when excavating nests, the team recommended the removal of dead trees from the area. For instance, upon learning that flickers forage for food on the ground, BIRD determined that tidy lawns made crawling insects easily visible. The team advised NASA to let the grass grow long to give the birds the impression that food was hard to catch.

Other, less subtle strategies were implemented to ensure that the birds didn't settle in. Deterred by plastic owls and floating balloons, alternatively, the flickers soon left for new territory. Their visit to the launchpad, however, was not soon forgotten. Discovery's successful launch was delayed five weeks while workers flocked to repair the fuel tank the flickers had favored.

[English questions 46-60 would continue here with answer choices F, G, H, J for each question]

PASSAGE V
Choreographing Change

[The following paragraphs may or may not be in the most logical order. Each paragraph is numbered in brackets, and question 74 will ask you to choose where Paragraph 3 should most logically be placed.]

[1]
The late German choreographer Pina Bausch once said, "I am not interested in how people move, but what moves them." Indeed, Bausch did not even consider herself a choreographer, but rather a kind of director. Her Tanztheater, translated "dance theater,' pieces received international acclaim for those expressive, unconventional style and the often-raw emotional feelings they portrayed.

[2]
When Bausch began her formal dance education in 1955, Expressionism was again the dominant style. Bausch followed the Expressionists' lead (and that of other dance pioneers like Martha Graham from the '20s). She tackled existential themes—identity, alienation, romantic entanglements, suffering—portrayed through intense, sometimes violent, movements.

[3]
By the 1920s and up until the onset of World War II. German art was flourishing and had turned to the abstract. Expressionism, as it was called, replaced representational, or literal, modes of painting. Bausch, born in 1940, having grown up in postwar Germany. The country was attempting to rebuild its economy, its infrastructure, and even the country's national identification after the fall of Hitler's regime. German artists, of whom work was previously suppressed by the Nazi party, could refresh without fear. They began to depict the country's fragile state in their work.

[4]
A Bausch piece may include any number of dancers of any age. Dancers' emotions are conveyed through gestures—joy, passion, grief—that range from subtle to explosive, stationary to dynamic. In Café Müller, one of her most famous works, dancers stumble across the stage, crashing into tables and chairs. Rite of Spring begins with a dancer lying prostrate on a stage, covered entirely with soil.

[5]
Travel to places such as Turkey, Portugal, and India have informed much of Bausch's work. She, often, incorporated, and combined dance traditions from the East and West, inspiring future choreographers. Her lasting influence lives on through revivals of her work.

[English questions 61-75 would continue here with answer choices A, B, C, D for each question]

MATHEMATICS TEST
60 Minutes—60 Questions

DIRECTIONS: Solve each problem, choose the correct answer, and then fill in the corresponding oval on your answer document.

Do not linger over problems that take too much time. Solve as many as you can; then return to the others in the time you have left for this test.

You are permitted to use a calculator on this test. You may use your calculator for any problems you choose, but some of the problems may best be done without using a calculator.

Note: Unless otherwise stated, all of the following should be assumed.
1. Illustrative figures are NOT necessarily drawn to scale.
2. Geometric figures lie in a plane.
3. The word line indicates a straight line.
4. The word average indicates arithmetic mean.

1. Given x = 5, y = 3, and z = -6, (x + y - z)(y + z) = ?
A. -42
B. -6
C. 6
D. 11
E. 18

2. Each student attending the East Central High School preprom dinner must choose 1 item from each of 3 categories: entrée, side dish, and beverage. There are 3 entrée choices, 4 side dish choices, and 2 beverage choices. How many different dinner combinations for each student are possible?
F. 8
G. 9
H. 12
J. 14
K. 24

3. A bag contains 13 solid-colored marbles: 3 red, 5 white, 4 black, and 1 yellow. If only 1 marble is selected, what is the probability of randomly selecting 1 marble that is NOT black?
A. 1/9
B. 4/9
C. 9/13
D. 4/13

[Math questions would continue through question 60 with answer choices A, B, C, D, E for F, G, H, J, K]

READING TEST
35 Minutes—40 Questions

DIRECTIONS: There are several passages in this test. Each passage is accompanied by several questions. After reading a passage, choose the best answer to each question and fill in the corresponding oval on your answer document. You may refer to the passages as often as necessary.

PASSAGE I
LITERARY NARRATIVE: This passage is adapted from the essay "Atop the Mound" by William Least Heat-Moon (©1991 by William Least Heat-Moon).

What I cherish I've come to slowly, usually blindly, not seeing it for some time, and that's just how I discovered Jacobs' Mound. This old travelers' marker shows up clearly from two highways, yet I was here several days before I noticed it, this isolated frustum so distinct. I must have been looking too closely and narrowly, but once I saw its volcano-cone symmetry I was drawn to it as western travelers have always been to lone protuberances—Independence Rock, Pompey's Pillar, Chimney Rock—and within a day I headed down the Bloody Creek Road until the lane played out in a grassed vale.

I walked down a hawk-harried ridge and struck out toward the mound, seemingly near enough to reach before sunset. In places the October grasses reached to my belt and stunted my strides. From the tall heads of Indian grass and the brown stalks of gayfeather, gossamer strung out in the slow wind, and these web lines snagged my trousers and chest and head until, after a mile, I was bestrung and on my way to becoming cocooned. I stopped to watch small events but never for long because the mound was drawing me as if it were a stone vortex in a petrified sea.

[Reading passages would continue through Passage IV with questions 1-40]

SCIENCE TEST
35 Minutes—40 Questions

DIRECTIONS: There are several passages in this test. Each passage is followed by several questions. After reading a passage, choose the best answer to each question and fill in the corresponding oval on your answer document. You may refer to the passages as often as necessary.

You are NOT permitted to use a calculator on this test.

PASSAGE I
The whitefly Bemisia argentifolii is an insect that has 3 distinct life stages: egg, nymph (juvenile), and adult. A study examined the effects of external temperature on the duration of each of the 3 life stages of B. argentifolii and on egg production by adult female B. argentifolii. Figure 1 shows, for each of 5 external temperatures, the average duration of each life stage. Figure 2 shows, for each of the 5 temperatures, the average number of eggs produced per female per day during the first 7 days of adult life.

[Science passages would continue through Passage VI with questions 1-40]

ANSWER KEY
English Test: 1.D 2.H 3.A 4.H 5.D 6.F 7.A 8.J 9.B 10.G 11.C 12.G 13.A 14.H 15.C 16.H 17.A 18.J 19.D 20.F 21.B 22.J 23.A 24.G 25.B 26.F 27.D 28.H 29.B 30.H 31.B 32.H 33.D 34.F 35.D 36.H 37.A 38.F 39.B 40.H 41.D 42.F 43.D 44.J 45.C 46.H 47.D 48.F 49.A 50.H 51.C 52.J 53.A 54.H 55.B 56.G 57.C 58.J 59.D 60.J 61.B 62.J 63.B 64.F 65.D 66.H 67.B 68.G 69.B 70.F 71.D 72.H 73.D 74.G 75.A

Mathematics Test: 1.A 2.K 3.D 4.J 5.D 6.F 7.B 8.K 9.D 10.K 11.A 12.H 13.D 14.G 15.B 16.H 17.D 18.K 19.C 20.J 21.B 22.H 23.E 24.G 25.E 26.H 27.C 28.H 29.C 30.J 31.B 32.F 33.D 34.F 35.C 36.J 37.E 38.K 39.A 40.J 41.C 42.H 43.A 44.H 45.B 46.K 47.A 48.F 49.E 50.F 51.A 52.G 53.D 54.F 55.C 56.J 57.B 58.H 59.D 60.K

Reading Test: 1.B 2.F 3.D 4.H 5.C 6.J 7.B 8.F 9.B 10.J 11.A 12.J 13.D 14.J 15.D 16.G 17.A 18.G 19.C 20.H 21.B 22.H 23.A 24.J 25.B 26.F 27.D 28.H 29.A 30.H 31.C 32.F 33.B 34.J 35.C 36.H 37.D 38.H 39.B 40.J

Science Test: 1.A 2.J 3.D 4.H 5.C 6.G 7.B 8.H 9.C 10.G 11.D 12.F 13.A 14.H 15.D 16.G 17.B 18.F 19.B 20.J 21.B 22.F 23.B 24.H 25.A 26.F 27.A 28.H 29.B 30.G 31.C 32.H 33.A 34.G 35.C 36.J 37.D 38.G 39.C 40.J