READING TEST
35 Minutes—40 Questions
DIRECTIONS: There are several passages in this test.
Each passage is accompanied by several questions.
After reading a passage, choose the best answer to each
question and fill
in the corresponding oval on your
answer document. You may refer to the passages as

often as necessary.

Passage
|

a tuft of grass to keep from convoluting my track.
Hiking in the woods allows a traveler to imagine comforting enclosures, one leading to the next, and the
45 walker can possess those little encompassed spaces, but
the prairie and plains permit no such possession. Whatever else prairie is—grass, sky, wind—it is most of all a
paradigm of infinity, a clearing full of many things
except boundaries, and its power comes from its appar50 ent limitlessness; there is no such thing as a small
prairie any more than there is a little ocean.

LITERARY NARRATIVE: This passage is adapted from the

essay “Atop the Mound” by William Least Heat-Moon (©1991
by William Least Heat-Moon).

What I cherish I’ve come to slowly, usually
blindly, not seeing it for some time, and that’s just how
I discovered Jacobs’ Mound. This old travelers’ marker
shows up clearly from two highways, yet I was here
several days before I noticed it, this isolated frustum so
distinct. I must have been looking too closely and narrowly, but once I saw its volcano-cone symmetry I was
drawn to it as western travelers have always been to
lone protuberances—Independence Rock, Pompey’s
10 Pillar, Chimney Rock—and within a day I headed down

I came up out of a hollow, Jacobs’ Mound big now
on the horizon, and I could feel its swell in my legs, and
then I was in the steep climb up its slope, and: I was on
55 top. From the highway I’d guessed the summit to be the
size of a city block, but it was less than a baseball
infield, its elliptical perimeter just a hundred strides.
So, its power lay not in size but rather in shape and
dominion and its thrust into the imagination.

the Bloody Creek Road until the lane played out in a
grassed vale.

15

20

I walked down a hawk-harried ridge and struck out
toward the mound, seemingly near enough to reach
before sunset. In places the October grasses reached to
my belt and stunted my strides. From the tall heads of
Indian grass and the brown stalks of gayfeather, gossamer strung out in the slow wind, and these web lines
snagged my trousers and chest and head until, after a
mile, I was bestrung and on my way to becoming
cocooned. I stopped to watch small events but never for
long because the mound was drawing me as if it were a
stone vortex in a petrified sea.

60

the air here hasn’t ever been used before. From a plane
you look down, and from a mountain you look down,
65 but from Jacobs’ Mound you look out, out into. You’re
not up in the sky and you’re not on the ground: you’re
nicely in-between, at the altitude of those who fly in
their dreams and skim roofs and treetops. Jacobs’
Mound is thrush-flight high.

There are several ways not to walk in the prairie,
and one of them is with your eye on a far goal, because
you then begin to believe you’re not closing the distance any more than you would with a mirage. My
woodland sense of scale and time didn’t fit this country,
and I started wondering whether I could reach the
30 summit before dark. On the prairie, distance and the
miles of air turn movement to stasis and openness to a
wall, a thing as difficult to penetrate as dense forest. It
seemed every time I raised a step the earth rotated
under me so that my foot fell just where it had lifted
35 from. Limits and markers make travel possible for
people: circumscribe our lines of sight and we can
really get somewhere. Before me lay the Kansas of popular conception from Coronado on—that place you
have to get through, that purgatory of mileage.

And then I understood: I like this prairie county
because of its illusion of being away, out of, and I like
how its unpopulousness seems to isolate it. Seventy
percent of Americans live on two percent of the land,
but in front of me, no percentage of them lived. Yet, in
75 the far southeast, I could see trucks inching out the
turnpike miles, the turbulence of their passage silenced
by distance. And I could see fence lines, transmission
towers, and dug ponds, things the pioneers would have
viewed as marks of a progressive civilization but which
80 to me, a grousing neo-primitivist, were signs of the
continuing onslaught. The view I had homesteaders
would have loved, and the one they had of unbroken
vegetation and its diversities I would cherish. In the
nineteenth century, the Kansas clergyman and author
85 William Quayle traded his autograph for an acre of
prairie, and, yesterday, I thought him a thief, but now,
seeing the paltriness of an acre, I figured he was the one
swindled.
70

25

40

But I kept walking, and, when I dropped into hollows and the mound disappeared, I focused on a rock or

ACT-E26

I sat and looked. The thousands of acres that lay
encircled around the knob I really didn’t see, not at
first. I saw air, and I recalled a woman saying, Seems

30

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE.

. The point of view from which the passage is told can
best be described as that of a first person narrator who:

a
C.
D.

6. According to the narrator, focusing on a distant goal
while walking in the prairie is not recommended
because:

is uncomfortable when he must traverse a large
section of unfamiliar prairie.
has an experience that leads to a deeper appreciation of the prairie.
visits the prairie in order to experience life as early
settlers might have.
has traded arduous hikes in the woods for leisurely
walks in the prairie.

omwm

When Jacobs’ Mound disappears from the narrator’s
sight, he shifts his focus to:

. How does the narrator see the power of the wider
prairie differing, if at all, from the power of Jacobs’
Mound?
F.

G.

A.
B.
C.
D.

The prairie’s power comes from its apparent limitlessness; the power of Jacobs’ Mound comes from
its hold on the imagination.
The prairie’s power comes from its unpopulousness; the power of Jacobs’ Mound comes from its

J.

The prairie’s power comes from its flat terrain; the
power of Jacobs’ Mound comes from its height.
Both places derive power from their size.

F.
G.

. The main idea of the sixth paragraph (lines 60-69) is
that:
A.

B.
C.
D.

H.

J.

few people other than the narrator have visited the
summit of Jacobs’ Mound.
the air at the top of Jacobs’ Mound is noticeably
different from the air at the bottom.
Jacobs’ Mound gives the impression of being away
from civilization.
the summit of Jacobs’ Mound exists in a special
place between the earth and the sky.

G.
H.

J.

FFYO

He traveled to the area specifically to climb
Jacobs’ Mound.
He has already climbed Independence Rock and
Pompey’s Pillar.
He prefers open, unpopulated areas to crowded
urban areas.
He believes urban development is annoying but

F.

. As it is used in line 23, the phrase petrified sea refers

G.

to:

ACT-E26

He is triumphant that he has reached a place few
other people have been.
He is somewhat surprised that the summit is not as
large as he had believed it would be.
He is overwhelmed by the brightness of the sun
and the smell of the grass.
He is pleased to see thrushes nesting on the
mound.

10. The narrator most likely includes the William Quayle
anecdote at the end of the passage to:

necessary.

POR

Wooded areas provide walkers with comforting
enclosures that the prairie lacks.
It takes longer to navigate wooded areas than it
does to navigate the prairie.
The flora and fauna are more diverse on the prairie
than in the woods.
The sun is much stronger on the prairie than in the
woods.

Which of the following statements best expresses how
the narrator first feels when he reaches the summit of
Jacobs’ Mound?

. Based on the passage, which of the following can most
reasonably be inferred about the narrator?
F.

clouds in the sky.
rocks and patches of grass.
fences and highways.
birds flying overhead.

According to the narrator, what is the main difference
between walking in wooded areas and walking in the
prairie?

size.

H.

distant objects often move in and out of sight.
there is the potential to miss small objects nearby.
walkers need to be aware of their immediate
surroundings.
doing so makes progress difficult to measure.

H.

Jacobs’ Mound.
the sky.
the prairie.
the highway.

J.

31

reveal the extent of his amazement that he has
finally reached the summit of Jacobs’ Mound.
help illustrate why he was drawn to Jacobs’
Mound in the first place.
give an example of the type of person who once
lived on the prairie.
further convey his sense of wonder at the sheer
size of the prairie.

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE.

Passage
Il
SOCIAL SCIENCE: This passage is adapted from The History
of Money by Jack Weatherford (©1997 by Jack Mclver
Weatherford).

Of the many great civilizations that flourished and
withered in ancient Anatolia, the Lydian does not rank
among the best known. The Lydians formed a small
kingdom in the seventh century BC, but at its height,
the Lydian kingdom was little more than an overgrown

10

15

city-state spread out from Sardis. The Lydian kings
were not celebrated in myth or song as great warriors,
conquerors, builders, or even lovers. Only one name of
ancient Lydia is commonly known today—Croesus. He
ascended to the Lydian throne in 560 BC to rule a kingdom that was already rich. His ancestors had made a
firm economic basis for the kingdom’s wealth by manufacturing some of the best perfumes and cosmetics of
the ancient world; yet these goods alone could not have
raised Croesus to the level of wealth that myth accords
him. For that, he depended on another invention of his
ancestors—coins, a new and revolutionary form of
money.

Something similar to money and something resembling markets can be found in Mesopotamia, China,
Egypt, and many other parts of the world, but they did
not actually use coins until the rise of Lydia and the
subsequent minting of the first coins, between 640 and
630 BC. The genius of the Lydian kings can be seen in
25 their recognition of the need for very small and easily
transported ingots worth no more than a few days’ labor
or a small part of a farmer’s harvest. By making these
small ingots in a standardized size and weight, and by
stamping on them an emblem that verified their worth
30 to even the illiterate, the kings of Lydia exponentially
expanded the possibilities of commercial enterprise.
20

The Lydians made the first coins of electrum, a
naturally occurring mixture of gold and silver. They
made the electrum into oval slugs several times thicker
35 than modern coins, or about the size of the end digit of
an adult’s thumb. To ensure their authenticity, the king
had each one stamped with the emblem of a lion’s head.
The stamping also flattened the lumps, beginning their
transition from an oval nugget to a flat, circular coin.
By making the nuggets the same weight and thus
approximately the same size, the king eliminated one of
the most time-consuming steps in commerce: the need
to weigh the gold each time a transaction was made.
Now merchants could assess the value by tale, or by
45 simply counting the number of coins. Such standardization greatly reduced the opportunity for cheating on the
amount or quality of gold and silver in an exchange.
One did not need to be an expert in handling a scale or
in judging the purity of metal in order to buy a basket
50 of wheat, a pair of sandals, or an amphora of olive oil.
The use of coins that had been weighed and stamped in
the royal workshop made it possible for commerce to
proceed much more rapidly and honestly, and it allowed
people to participate even if they did not own a scale.
40

ACT-E26

55

The commerce of coins opened up new dimensions for
new segments of the population.

The wealth of Croesus and his ancestors arose not
from conquest but from trade. During his reign
(560-546 BC), Croesus created new coins of pure gold
60 and silver rather than electrum. Using their newly
invented coins as a standardized medium of exchange,
the Lydian merchants traded in the daily necessities of
life—grain, oil, leather, pottery, and wood—as well as
in luxury goods such as perfumes, cosmetics, jewelry,
65 musical instruments, glazed ceramics, bronze figurines,
mohair, purple cloth, marble, and ivory.

The variety and abundance of commercial goods
quickly led to another innovation: the retail market.
Rather than leaving buyers to seek out the home of
70 someone who might have oil or jewelry to sell, the
kings of Sardis set up an innovative new system in
which anyone, even a stranger, with something to sell
could come to a central market. Numerous small shops
lined the market, and each merchant specialized in par75 ticular goods. One sold meat, and another offered grain.
One sold jewelry, another cloth. One sold musical
instruments, another pots. This market system began in
the late seventh century BC, but its descendants can
clearly be seen in the later Greek agora, in the medieval
80 market squares of northern Europe, and in suburban
shopping malls of the contemporary United States.
With the conquest of Lydia by Cyrus, the reign of
Croesus ended, and the Lydian kingdom disappeared
from the pages of history. The impact of that small and
85 relatively unknown kingdom has remained vastly disproportionate to its geographic size and relatively
minor role in ancient history.

11. The main idea of the passage is that:

a
C.
D.

the system of coins and trade created by Lydians
radically transformed commerce.
the development of currency can be traced chronologically from 640 BC to 560 BC.
money was invented when Croesus became king of
Lydia.
the coins minted in Lydia are the first gold coins
known to exist.

12. According to the passage, one outcome of stamping
Lydian coins with the emblem of a lion’s head was that
the coins:

F.
G.
H.
J.

became easier to distinguish from currency used in
the common marketplace.
were no longer clearly marked as property of the
king.
varied more in size and weight.
became flatter and more circular.

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE.

13. What is the “innovative new system” referred to in
line 71?

A.
B.
C.
D.

18. Which of the following cause-effect relationships is
referred to in the passage?

The sale of goods by a producer to a merchant and
then to a consumer
The sale of goods over long distances
The use of scales in the marketplace for business
transactions
The sale of many types of goods in one marketplace

F.

G.
H.

J.

14. The author most likely uses the term overgrown citystate (lines 5—6) in order to:
F.
G.
H.
J.

emphasize the importance of Lydia.
indicate the rapid growth of Sardis.
make the point that Lydia was small.
identify the government structure of Lydia.

19. In the passage, wood is mentioned as an example of a:

A.

15. The passage states that when Croesus ascended the
throne, Lydia was already:

A.
B.
C.
D.

Instituting scales in the marketplace led to greater
honesty in transactions.
Introducing standardized coins into commerce
made it more inclusive of a wide range of people.
Stamping designs on coins initially led some
buyers to confuse coins with jewelry.
Lydia’s conquering of neighboring countries
allowed Lydia to replace their monetary systems.

POF

celebrated in myths.
past the peak of its political power.
at war with Sardis.
ina firm economic position.

material that coins were made of prior to the reign
of Croesus.
material from which Croesus first made coins.
daily necessity of life during the reign of Croesus.
precious material Lydia imported for use by the
wealthy class.

16. As it is used in line 15, the word accords most nearly
means:

F.
G.
H.
J.

20. Which of the following statements best paraphrases the
last sentence of the passage?

confines.
assigns.
owes.
measures.

F.
G.

17. According to the passage, which of the following is
true of electrum?

A.
B.
C.
D.

ACT-E26

H.

Itis naturally occurring.
It was worth more than gold under Croesus’s rule.
It is easier to stamp than silver or gold.
It is heavier than silver.

J.

33

Lydia played a minor role in ancient history, in
spite of its rulers’ attempts to achieve glory.
The world before Lydia and the one after Lydia are
vastly different, due to the greed of Croesus.
Despite its size and historical status, Lydia has had
an enormous influence on the world.
The kings of Lydia made decisions about commerce that relegated their kingdom to a minor role
in history.

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE.

Passage
Ill
HUMANITIES: Passage A

50 rhythm with which a weeping woman would dab her

is adapted from the article “The Ten-

sion of Modern Bunraku” by Theodora Skipitares (©2004 by
Performing Arts Journal, Inc.). Passage B is adapted from the
article “Lifelike” by Joan Acocella (©2009 by Condé Nast).

Passage A by Theodora Skipitares
Even before I began using puppets in my performances in 1982, I had always felt connected to the
Japanese Bunraku theatre. The structure of the Bunraku
theatre as a series of three splits or fragments of the
conventions of Western theatre (text, music, and
puppet) seemed to me a new way to organize a performance. The puppet, along with the manipulator, was a
separate entity, and so was the narrator, as was the
musician (the latter two on a platform to one side).
10 Bunraku presented a total, though divided, spectacle.
One’s focus could go back and forth between the
manipulator or the puppet, the manipulation or the
resulting gesture.

15

20

25

Japanese puppet drama developed at a rapid pace
in the 1700s. Male puppeteers were hidden from the
public by a curtain while they held (one-man) puppets,
about two feet tall, above their heads. The narrator and
musician were also hidden. In 1703, a group of puppeteers created a sensation when they appeared in full
view of the audience, separated only by a translucent
curtain. The curtain itself was eliminated two years
later. In 1728, the narrator and musician were given
their own auxiliary stage, the yuka. Since then, one
unusual feature of the Japanese puppet theatre is that
the manipulator makes no attempt to conceal the fact
that he is manipulating the puppets. Unlike puppet performances from other countries, this Japanese form
does not require the illusion that the puppets are
moving and talking on their own.

In 1983, I began to use a modified Bunraku performance style for certain life-size human figures. I spent
plenty of time trying to make them super-realistic, so
that their skin looked lifelike, their eyes blinked “naturally,” and their hands could actually grab objects.
35 What I didn’t understand then about Bunraku theatre
was that its greatness lay in the constant tension, and
the attempt to strike a balance between realism and
nonrealism. Bunraku was not trying to persuade the
audience it was watching reality, rather than a play.
40 And I was very much interested in creating a flat surface of reality. Looking back, I feel that I was barely
exploring the full potential of the Japanese form.
30

Passage B by Joan Acocella

45

Japanese puppetry takes its great power from the
fact that it is very realistic and very artificial at the
same time. As was proved again by the Awaji Puppet
Theatre Company’s recent season at Japan Society,
what strikes you first is the realism. The puppeteers
seem to have spent five centuries (that is the genre’s
estimated age, at minimum) working out the precise

ACT-E26

eyes with her sleeve. The lifelikeness is indeed a thrill.
But the reason that we can enjoy the realism is that in
other respects, most respects, these figures are not at all
like us. The Awaji puppets are about three feet tall, to
55 start with. Furthermore, to get around, they need three
men, with rods and springs, manipulating them. The
puppeteers are clothed and masked in black, but that
doesn’t mean that we don’t see them.
All this, maybe, we could shut out, and enter fully
60 into the illusion, but there is another thing stopping us:

the fixity of the puppets’ faces. Awaji dramas, like their
Bunraku counterparts, often concern the furthest outdistricts of human emotion. In one of the offerings at
Japan Society, “Hidakagawa Iriai Zakura” (1759), a
65 woman becomes so jealous that she turns into a green
sea monster. Such dramatic events are preceded by
long, histrionic speeches, but, as the characters deliver
their orations, their faces, eerily, do not move. The
emotion is displaced from the face and thereby gains in
70 subtlety and force.
As for the characters’ words, those, too, are displaced—to a chanter. This person, considered the star
of the puppetry team, sits to the side of the stage, where
he tells the story and, when necessary, speaks the dia75 logue. The crux, however, is not the words but the
singing. The chanter sobs; he gasps; he calls on Heaven
to witness his grief. (And he does so in male and
female, old and young, high-status and low-status
voices.) When the woman in “Hidakagawa” describes
80 her jealousy, the chanter runs the gamut of vocal
expressiveness: head notes and belly notes, squeals and
grunts, trills and runs without end. Meanwhile, the lady
for whom he is speaking stands there with an unmoving
face, white and lustrous, like a pearl. We seem, here, to
85 get everything that art can give: the abstemious and the
unleashed, the Gothic and the Baroque. The logic is not
logical; it is lyrical, musical.

Questions 21-24 ask about Passage A.

21. The author of Passage A suggests that changes in
Bunraku that occurred in the early 1700s led to which
of the following effects?

FFYO

They made Bunraku more popular in countries
beyond Japan.
They differentiated Bunraku from the puppetry of
other countries.
They created the illusion that Bunraku puppets
moved and talked on their own.
They brought about a shift in the kinds of stories
that were recounted in Bunraku theater.

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE.

3 Ds
S
22. One main function of the last paragraph of Passage A
(lines 30—42) is to:
F.

G.
H.

J.

27. In the first paragraph of Passage B (lines 43-58), the
author provides the example of the weeping woman
most likely to:

explain the author’s perspective on the Japanese
methods used to create puppets.
suggest that puppets are inevitably unrealistic in
their appearance.
describe a shortcoming in the author’s early understanding of Bunraku.
assert that the complexity of Bunraku comes from
its depiction of a flat surface of reality.

FYO

23. In Passage A, how does the author explain her interest
in Bunraku?

a
C.
D.

She indicates that she had always felt a connection
to Bunraku.
She suggests that her own experimentation with
puppet performances led her to Bunraku.
She states that she had always appreciated the long
history of Bunraku.
She describes how performances at Japan Society
inspired her to explore Bunraku.

Questions 28-30 ask about both passages.

28. Regarding the perspectives from which the passage
authors write, the two passages are:

24. The author of Passage A identifies Bunraku theater as
combining what three fragments of Western theater?

F.
G.
H.
J.

F.

Puppet, manipulator, and musician
Music, auxiliary stage, and puppet
Narrator, puppet, and text
Text, music, and puppet

G.

Questions 25-27 ask about Passage B.

J.

25. In Passage B, how does the statement that “Awaji
dramas, like their Bunraku counterparts, often concern
the furthest outdistricts of human emotion” (lines
61-63) figure into the author’s discussion?
A.

B.

C.

D.

G.
H.

J.

ACT-E26

similar; both authors indicate that they are writing
from the perspective of a spectator of puppet
theater.
similar; both authors indicate that they are writing
from the perspective of a practitioner of puppet
theater.
different; the author of Passage A writes from the
perspective of a practitioner of puppet theater and
the author of Passage B from that of a spectator.
different; the author of Passage A writes from the
perspective of a spectator of puppet theater and the
author of Passage B from that of a practitioner.

29. Which of the following statements regarding the
gender of the puppeteers in Japanese theater can most
reasonably be inferred from the passages?

It is a generalization the author mentions but does

not discuss further in the passage.
It is an assertion the author makes to emphasize
the disparity between the intensity of the story and
the stillness of the puppets’ faces.
It is a widely held assumption the author mentions
as part of her claim that most people fail to see the
hidden strength of Japanese puppetry.
It is an opinion the author supports with several
examples of Japanese puppetry from the 1700s to
today.

A.
B.

C.
D.

26. It can reasonably be inferred from Passage B that the
chanter is often considered the star of Awaji theater
mainly because the:

F.

suggest that the Awaji Puppet Theatre Company
focuses on plays that are sad.
indicate that the Awaji Puppet Theatre Company
has existed for five centuries.
emphasize the range of emotions that Awaji puppets are visibly able to express.
explain the artistic precision that makes the Awaji
puppets’ gestures seem realistic.

Traditionally, the performers have been male.
Women began taking part in performances in the
early 1700s.
Japanese theater is unique in that it has always
incorporated both male and female performers.
Men hold the puppets, but women speak and sing.

30. The passages are similar in that both authors reach the
conclusion that the form of Japanese puppetry they
discuss:

chanter’s dynamic singing conveys the intensity
and drama of the story.
chanter occupies the stage along with the puppets
and interacts with them.
chanter’s responsibilities include directing and
coordinating the other puppeteers.
chanter composes the text that ultimately gives
meaning to the puppets’ gestures.

F._
G.
H.
J.

35

reached the height of its popularity in Japan in the
1700s.
is difficult to fully appreciate without years of
study.
derives strength from its balance of realism and
artificiality.
is at its best when used to tell complex fictional
stories.

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE.

Passage IV
NATURAL SCIENCE: This passage is adapted from the article

“Sociable, and Smart” by Carl Zimmer (©2008 by The New
York Times Company).

Scientists have long puzzled over the enormous
size of the human brain. It is seven times larger than
one would predict for an average mammal of our size.
Many of our extra neurons are in a region of the brain
called the frontal cortex, where much of the most
sophisticated thought takes place.

10

15

20

To understand how we ended up with such a
strange organ, many scientists have turned to our fellow
primates. They also have large brains, although not as
large as our own. It turns out that primates with a big
frontal cortex tend to live in large groups.
Primates may be pushed into larger groups thanks
to predators or to patchy sources of food like fruit trees.
As their numbers grow, natural selection may favor
social intelligence. The primates form long-term
alliances with each other and compete with rivals. They
begin to keep track of a larger and larger social
network.
A boost in social intelligence can lead to an evolutionary edge for primates. Well-connected female
baboons, for example, dominate their bands. They have
more babies than lower-ranking females, and their
babies enjoy better health and faster growth.
Brain imaging studies have revealed that when

25

people think about other people, parts of the frontal
cortex become active. Advocates of the social brain
hypothesis say the frontal cortex expanded in our
ancestors because natural selection favored social
intelligence.

Most of the research on the social brain hypothesis
has focused on primates. One reason for that bias,
Dr. Kaye Holekamp, a professor at Michigan State University, said, is many scientists thought that no other
animals were worth studying. “Primatologists have
35 argued for years,” she said, “that primates are unique in
terms of the complexity of their social lives.”
30

40

45

From her experience with hyenas, Dr. Holekamp
had her doubts. So she began to run experiments on
spotted hyenas similar to the ones run on primates. She
would play recordings of hyenas, for example, to see if
other hyenas recognized them individually. They did.
She soon came to see the primates-only view of the
social brain as deeply flawed.

To understand the social intelligence of hyenas,
Dr. Holekamp and her colleagues track the animals
from birth to death. Their work begins in the communal
dens where the cubs live for their first few months.
Older spotted hyenas pay regular visits to the dens,
55 giving the cubs an opportunity to learn about the rigid
hierarchy in which they live. Spotted hyena societies
have one dominant female at the top, and a series of
hyenas below her. Each cub learns exactly where it fits
into the hierarchy, and where all the other spotted
60 hyenas fit as well.
50

The hierarchy reveals itself most vividly when it is
time to eat. When one or two hyenas make a kill, other
members of the clan will join them to fight over the
prey. But the dominant female always wins.
65

70

There are times, however, when the entire group of
hyenas comes together. Spotted hyena clans patrol the
borders of their territory together. “When the whole
group territory is on the line,’ Dr. Holekamp said, “all
these unrelated individuals join forces and engage in a
clan war.”

What makes the social complexity of spotted
hyenas particularly enlightening, Dr. Holekamp said,
are their relatives. They belong to a family of four
species, and the other three live in strikingly different
75 societies. Dr. Holekamp wonders if this range of social
arrangements is reflected in the structure of hyena
brains.
From a CT-scan of a hyena skull, it is possible to
reconstruct the three-dimension structure of the brain it
80 held. Dr. Holekamp and her colleagues have been working to survey dozens of skulls from all four species in
the hyena family. Their preliminary results indicate
hyenas follow the same rules as primates.

85

90

“It’s just what the social complexity hypothesis
would predict,” Dr. Holekamp said. “The hyenas with
the simplest social systems have the tiniest frontal cortices. The spotted hyena, which lives in the most complex societies, has far and away the largest frontal
cortex.”
Joan Silk, an expert on monkey societies at the
University
of California, Los
Angeles, praises
Dr. Holekamp’s research, calling it “directly relevant to
our understanding of the origins of social complexity
and intelligence.”

“I would argue that’s not true at all: spotted hyenas
live in a society just as large and just as complex as
baboons’,” Dr. Holekamp said, noting that spotted
hyenas live in the largest social groups of any carnivore. “We’re talking about 60 to 80 individuals who all
know each other individually.”

ACT-E26

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE.

31. One main purpose of the passage is to:
A.
a
C.
D.

contrast the structure of a hyena’s brain with the
structure of a human’s brain.
argue that studies of hyenas have revealed more
about brain function than have studies of primates.
discuss what the study of hyenas has revealed
about the evolution of social intelligence.
compare the evolutionary histories of the four
species in the hyena family.

32. The author cites brain imaging studies in the fifth paragraph (lines 24—29) primarily to support the passage’s
point that:
F.
G.
H.
J.

the frontal cortex is the center of social intelligence.
most of a human’s extra neurons are located in the
frontal cortex.
the majority of research on the social brain
hypothesis is focused on primates.
it’s possible to reconstruct the three-dimension
structure of the hyena brain from a CT scan of a
skull.

33. When the author states that hyenas “follow the same
rules as primates” (line 83), he most likely means that:
A.
B.
C.
D.

the hyena’s diet closely resembles that of primates.
primates and hyenas who live in large groups have
large frontal cortices.
primates and hyenas tend to form long-term
alliances with other species.
the structure of the hyena skull is identical to that
of the primate skull.

34. Based on the passage, Holekamp’s research most
directly challenges which of the following arguments
made by some primatologists?
F.

G.

J.

Primates are favored by natural selection because
they are better equipped to locate patchy sources
of food.
Primates are the only animals worth studying for
social brain hypothesis research.

35. According to the passage, when Holekamp and her colleagues analyzed hyena skulls, they determined that:

FYO

es.
G.
H.

territory disputes with hyenas.
an innate desire to stay close to their relatives.
the presence of predators.

J.

alack of suitable shelter.

37. In the passage, the author discusses female baboons
primarily to illustrate how:
A.

FYO

subtle differences in hyena skulls enable hyenas to
recognize fellow clan members.
hyenas with larger skulls tend to have a smaller
frontal cortex.
the structure of the hyena brain varies among the
different hyena species.
the structure of the hyena brain has changed little
over the centuries.

female primates have higher social intelligence
than do male primates.
limited sources of food cause animals to be
aggressive toward one another.
primates learn the hierarchy of their social group
from their mothers.

increased social intelligence can give animals an
evolutionary advantage.

38. Which of the following theories about the evolution of
the human brain is presented in the passage?
F.

G.

During the early stages in the evolution of the
human brain, growth in the frontal cortex was
inhibited by the structure of the skull.
After developing the ability to produce sophisticated thought, the human brain began to produce
extra neurons.

H.

J.

Primates with a high social rank have more babies
than do high-ranking members of other animal
species.
Primates are the only animals that live in large
groups.

H.

36. The author speculates that primates may be pushed to
live in large groups due in part to:

Because natural selection favors social intelligence, the human frontal cortex began to increase
in size.
Humans first developed a frontal cortex when they
began to form long-term alliances to better compete with rivals.

39. According to the passage, when does a spotted hyena
first learn its place in the hierarchy of its clan?
A.
B.
C.
D.

While participating in its first fight over prey
While living in the communal den
When patrolling the clan’s territory for the first
time
Shortly after leaving the communal den

40. According to the passage, compared to other species of
hyenas, spotted hyenas:
F.
G.
H.
J.

are more likely to be carnivores.
are less likely to be territorial.
have smaller frontal cortices.
live in more complex societies.

END OF TEST 3
STOP! DO NOT TURN THE PAGE UNTIL TOLD TO DO SO.
DO NOT RETURN TO A PREVIOUS TEST.
ACT-E26

Acoooooaococoaondd
SCIENCE TEST
